__label__en Tor Erik Torske (born 14 July 1983) is a Norwegian football player currently playing as a striker for Sunndal. After one Eliteserien season with Kristiansund his contract was not renewed and he returned to his former club Sunndal. Career statistics References 1983 births Living people Footballers from Molde People from Sunndal Norwegian men's footballers Norwegian First Division players Kristiansund BK players Eliteserien players Men's association football forwards
__label__en Musaad Aruchi was a Pakistani courier who worked in connection with al Qaeda before his capture in April 2004. Some of his files, secured when he was captured, led to the capture of Muhammad Naeem Noor Khan, who was later released without charge. It was later determined that Aruchi was the nephew of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and not a "senior member of the al Qaeda leadership" as previously reported. Human Rights Watch lists Aruchi as one of detainees in CIA custody. See also Ghost detainee References Pakistani extrajudicial prisoners of the United States Living people Year of birth missing (living people)
__label__en M40 and M41 are both gearboxes produced by Koping Engineering for Volvo and used in Volvo Duett, Volvo Valp, Volvo Amazon, Volvo 142 and many more. It is a four speed gearbox. It was also available in a stronger version called M400 and a three speed version called M30. Gear Ratios References Volvo Cars Automobile transmissions
__label__en Meroselenidium is a genus of parasitic alveolates in the phylum Apicomplexa. Species in this genus infect marine invertebrates. Taxonomy This genus was described by Mackinnon and Ray in 1933. There is one species in this genus – Meroselenidium keilini. Description The trophozoites live within the gut lumen. They measure 200–300 μm × 40–70 μm. There are 30–40 grooves along the body. Four refringent rods are present in the mucron. A vacuole may also be present in the mucron. Schizogony occurs in the intestinal epithelium and gives rise to multiple merozoites. Synergy is caudo-caudal. The gametocysts are 70 μm × 55 μm and give rise to multiple gametes. After fertilization the zygote gives rise to ~20 sporocysts. There is no residual body. The sporocysts are bivalved and give rise to multiple sporozoites. The species in this genus, Merselenidium keilini, forms transversely striated folds. Life cycle This species infects the anterior intestine of the polychaete Potamilla reniformis. The parasite infects the gastrointestinal tract and is presumably transmitted by the orofaecal route but the details of this mechanism are presently unknown. References Apicomplexa genera
__label__en Rags is a BBC Books original novel written by Mick Lewis and based on the long-running British science fiction television series Doctor Who. It features the Third Doctor and Jo. Premise A strange group of musicians begins giving free outdoor concerts across the West of England, attracting a caravan of young, alienated followers. The Doctor investigates the unearthly forces behind the band and the odd acts of violence that follow in its wake. External links 2001 British novels 2001 science fiction novels Past Doctor Adventures Third Doctor novels BBC Books books
__label__en Orlando Ortiz Chevres (born April 21, 1978) is a Puerto Rican politician and the current mayor of Naranjito. Ortiz is affiliated with the New Progressive Party (PNP) and has served as mayor since 2009. Graduated from Francisco Morales high school in Naranjito. In 2003 he obtained a master's degree in administration and human resources from the Interamerican University of Puerto Rico. Ortiz is also serves in the Puerto Rico National Guard since 2005. In February 2020 he obtained the certification in "Financial Management Technician 36b" at the Fort Knox Kentucky, USA, where he specialized in finance. References Living people Interamerican University of Puerto Rico alumni Mayors of places in Puerto Rico New Progressive Party (Puerto Rico) politicians People from Naranjito, Puerto Rico Puerto Rico National Guard personnel 1978 births
__label__en Halina Bronisława Olendzka (born 31 August 1945 in Święta Katarzyna) is a Polish politician. She was elected to the Sejm on 25 September 2005, getting 5386 votes in 33 Kielce district as a candidate from the Law and Justice list. See also Members of Polish Sejm 2005-2007 External links Halina Olendzka - parliamentary page - includes declarations of interest, voting record, and transcripts of speeches. 1945 births Living people People from Kielce County Members of the Polish Sejm 2005–2007 Women members of the Sejm of the Republic of Poland Law and Justice politicians 21st-century Polish women politicians Members of the Polish Sejm 2011–2015
__label__en McAllister Springs is an unincorporated community in Saline County, in the U.S. state of Missouri. History A variant name was "McAllister". A post office called McAllister was established in 1881, and remained in operation until 1907. The nearby springs bear the name of one Mr. McAllister, the original owner of the site. References Unincorporated communities in Saline County, Missouri Unincorporated communities in Missouri
__label__en Maximilian "Max" von der Groeben (born 15 January 1992) is a German actor. His father Alexander von der Groeben is a former judoka, sports journalist and also an actor. His mother Ulrike von der Groeben is also a sports journalist. He has one Sister, Caroline, who also works as an actress. Selected filmography References External links 1992 births Living people German male film actors Male actors from Cologne
__label__en Huế station is a railway station in the city of Huế, Vietnam on the main North–South railway. The street address is 2 Bui Thi Xuan Street, Huế, Thừa Thiên–Huế Province, Vietnam. The station was built by the French colonial authorities during the French Indochina period. The station is influenced by French architecture and is today considered one of the most beautiful railway stations in Vietnam. Built by the French Public Works Department, it was considered a "rectangular horror" according to a source from 1913. During the Vietnam War in the Battle of Hue the station housed snipers but U.S. troops drove them out. References Buildings and structures in Huế Railway stations in Vietnam
__label__en WFHS may refer to: WFHS-LP, a defunct radio station (92.7 FM) formerly licensed to serve Fern Creek, Kentucky, United States West Florida High School of Advanced Technology, Pensacola, Florida, United States West Forsyth High School (Georgia), Cumming, Georgia, United States West Forsyth High School (North Carolina), Clemens, North Carolina, United States West Franklin High School, Pomona, Kansas, United States Wichita Falls High School, Wichita Falls, Texas, United States William Floyd High School, Brookhaven, New York, United States Williams Field High School, Gilbert, Arizona, United States Windsor Forest High School, Savannah, Georgia, United States West Fargo High School, West Fargo, North Dakota, United States
__label__en Nikolay Sergeyevich Zhurkin (; born 5 May 1991) is a Russian professional racing cyclist, who most recently rode for UCI Continental team . Major results 2009 1st Kilo, UCI Juniors Track World Championships UEC European Junior Track Championships 2nd Sprint 3rd Kilo 2010 3rd Kilo, UEC European Under-23 Track Championships 2012 1st Team pursuit, UEC European Under-23 Track Championships 2013 1st Team pursuit, 2012–13 UCI Track Cycling World Cup, Aguascalientes 2015 1st Stage 3 Bałtyk–Karkonosze Tour 2019 Vuelta Ciclista a Costa Rica 1st Stages 3b (TTT) & 6 References External links 1991 births Living people Russian male cyclists Sportspeople from Dushanbe
__label__en Angela Harris may refer to: Angela Harris, Baroness Harris of Richmond (born 1944), British peer Angela P. Harris (born 1961), law professor at University of California, Davis School of Law Angela Harris (Coronation Street), fictional character in British TV soap opera Coronation Street Angela Harris (swimmer) (born 1967), Australian swimmer who competed at the 1984 Summer Olympics Angela Harris (singer) (born 1971), Canadian country singer Angie Akers (born 1976), née Harris, American beach volleyball player See also Angela Harry (born 1963), American model and actress
__label__en Pseudorthodes is a genus of moths of the family Noctuidae. Species Pseudorthodes angustimargo (Dyar, 1910) Pseudorthodes ignescens (Schaus, 1903) Pseudorthodes iole (Schaus, 1894) Pseudorthodes irrorata (Smith, 1888) Pseudorthodes keela (Smith, 1908) Pseudorthodes puerilis (Grote, 1874) Pseudorthodes vecors (Guenée, 1852) (=Pseudorthodes imora (Strecker, 1898), Pseudorthodes calceolaris (Strecker, 1900)) Pseudorthodes virgula (Grote, 1883) References Natural History Museum Lepidoptera genus database Pseudorthodes at funet Hadeninae
__label__en Transverse muscle may refer to: Transverse abdominal muscle Transverse muscle of tongue Transverse muscle of the chin, a facial muscle Transverse perineal muscles Deep transverse perineal muscle Superficial transverse perineal muscle
__label__en The Columbus Southern Open was a golf tournament on the Champions Tour played only in 2003. It was played in Columbus, Georgia at the Green Island Country Club. The purse for the tournament was US$1,500,000, with $225,000 going to the winner, Morris Hatalsky. References Former PGA Tour Champions events Golf in Georgia (U.S. state) Sports in Columbus, Georgia 2003 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state) 2003 disestablishments in Georgia (U.S. state) 2003 in sports in Georgia (U.S. state)
__label__en Jordan Henri (born 30 April 1993) is a Belgian footballer who currently plays for La Louvière as a winger. Career In August 2017, Henri joined Olympic Charleroi. He played for the club for two years, before joining La Louvière. References External links 1993 births Living people Belgian men's footballers Men's association football midfielders UR La Louvière Centre players Royale Union Tubize-Braine players R. Olympic Charleroi Châtelet Farciennes players R.A.A. Louviéroise players Challenger Pro League players
__label__en Chris Summers (born 7 November 1974) is mostly known for his work with the Norwegian deathpunk band Turbonegro (in Norwegian: Turboneger), where he played the drums from 1998 to 2008. Engen has also played with the Norwegian band BigBang. He was engaged to Norwegian singer Elvira Nikolaisen. References External links turbonegro.com turbojugend.net 1970 births Living people Norwegian rock drummers Male drummers Turbonegro members 21st-century Norwegian drummers Bigbang (Norwegian band) members
__label__en Since the founding of the Leicester Tigers rugby union club (as Leicester Football Club) in 1880, more than 150 players have represented their national teams while members of the club. The "position" column lists the position at which the player played in his first international while a member of Leicester Tigers, not necessarily the position for which he is best known; where brackets () are used, this indicates an appearance as a replacement. Ben Youngs, for instance, made his debut as a replacement wing but is best known as a scrum-half. The "date first cap obtained" column lists the date of their first cap obtained while at Leicester Tigers not their international debut. JP Pietersen for instance won many international caps for South Africa before joining Leicester. Sources Players selected for International rugby Rugby union-related lists Leicester-related lists
__label__en Gidderbaha Assembly constituency (Sl. No.: 84) is a Punjab Legislative Assembly constituency in Muktsar district, Punjab state, India. Members of the Legislative Assembly Election results 2022 2017 2012 See also Simranjit Singh Mann Faridkot Lok Sabha constituency References External links Assembly constituencies of Punjab, India Sri Muktsar Sahib district
__label__en United Nations Security Council Resolution 358, adopted unanimously on 15 August 1974, deeply concerned about the continuing violence and bloodshed in Cyprus and deploring the non-compliance with resolution 357, the Council recalled its previous resolutions on the matter and insisted on their full implementation and that all parties immediately and strictly observe the cease-fire. See also Cyprus dispute List of United Nations Security Council Resolutions 301 to 400 (1971–1976) Turkish invasion of Cyprus References Text of the Resolution at undocs.org External links 0358 0358 Turkish invasion of Cyprus 0358 August 1974 events
__label__en Charles Bradley Miller (September 10, 1868 – September 3, 1945) was a Major League Baseball outfielder. He played all or part of seven seasons in the majors, between and , for the St. Louis Browns/Perfectos, Cincinnati Reds, and Baltimore Orioles. In 656 games over seven seasons, Miller posted a .301 batting average (771-for-2561) with 445 runs, 22 home runs, 421 RBI, 206 stolen bases, 174 bases on balls and .421 slugging percentage. Miller died in Memphis, Tennessee in 1945 of coronary thrombosis. See also List of Major League Baseball career stolen bases leaders References External links 1868 births 1945 deaths Major League Baseball outfielders Baseball players from Pennsylvania St. Louis Perfectos players St. Louis Browns (AA) players Cincinnati Reds players Baltimore Orioles (AA) players 19th-century baseball players Niagara Purple Eagles baseball players Toledo Mud Hens players Chattanooga Lookouts players Memphis Egyptians players Birmingham Barons players Mobile Sea Gulls players Nashville Vols players People from Oil City, Pennsylvania Nashville Tigers players Deaths from coronary thrombosis
__label__en Tizi N'Isly is a town and rural commune in Béni Mellal Province, Béni Mellal-Khénifra, Morocco. At the time of the 2004 census, the commune had a total population of 10,060 people living in 1806 households. References Populated places in Béni Mellal Province Rural communes of Béni Mellal-Khénifra
__label__en is located in the Hidaka Mountains, Hokkaidō, Japan. This peak shares its name with the nearby . References Shyun Umezawa, Yasuhiko Sugawara, and Jun Nakagawa, Hokkaidō Natsuyama Gaido 4: Hidaka Sanmyaku no Yamayama (北海道夏山ガイド4日高山脈の山やま), Sapporo, Hokkaidō Shimbunshya, 1991. Google Maps Geographical Survey Institute Nukabira
__label__en Bryan Patrick Dechart (born March 17, 1987) is an American actor, voice actor and Twitch streamer. He is known for his role as Connor in the video game Detroit: Become Human. He has also played Eli Chandler on Jane by Design and made appearances on Switched at Birth and True Blood. Personal life Dechart was born in Salt Lake City, Utah and raised outside Novi, Michigan. He went to Novi High School and graduated from the New York University Tisch School of the Arts with a BFA in acting. He married actress Amelia Rose Blaire on June 30, 2018. Filmography Film Television Web Video games Music videos Awards References External links 1987 births Living people Actual play performers American male film actors American male television actors American male video game actors American male voice actors Male actors from Salt Lake City People from Novi, Michigan Tisch School of the Arts alumni Twitch (service) streamers 21st-century American male actors
__label__en Ginestreto is a village in Tuscany, central Italy, in the comune of Siena, province of Siena. At the time of the 2001 census its population was 36. Ginestreto is about 6 km from Siena. References Frazioni of Siena
__label__en Qaleh-ye Harasam (, also Romanized as Qal‘eh-ye Harasam and Qal‘eh Harasam; also known as Harasam) is a village in Harasam Rural District, Homeyl District, Eslamabad-e Gharb County, Kermanshah Province, Iran. At the 2006 census, its population was 698, in 152 families. References Populated places in Eslamabad-e Gharb County
__label__en Eudiaphora is a monotypic genus of tiger moths in the family Erebidae erected by Vladimir Viktorovitch Dubatolov in 1990. Its only species, Eudiaphora turensis, was first described by Nikolay Grigoryevich Erschoff in 1874. It is found in the mountains and deserts of Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan, western Mongolia, and China (Xinjiang). Species and subspecies Eudiaphora turensis (Erschoff, 1874) Eudiaphora turensis kopetdaghica Dubatolov, 2004 Eudiaphora turensis kuhitangica Dubatolov, 2004 References , 2004: Review of the genus Eudiaphora Dubat. (Lepidoptera, Arctiidae) with description of two new subspecies from Turkmenistan. Euroasian Entomological Journal 3 (2): 151–154, colour plate II, KMK Press: Novosibirsk-Moscow (in Russian). Spilosomina Monotypic moth genera Moths of Asia
__label__en Vever is a small village situated in Novi Pazar municipality in Serbia. According to the 2011 census, there were 9 inhabitants. The average age of the inhabitants is 50.4 years (48.4 for men and 53.0 for women.) There are 7 households in the settlement, and the average number of members per household is 2.7. The settlement is completely populated by Serbs (according to the 2002 census), and in the last three censuses there has been a decrease in population. References Translated using the Serbian article (https://sr.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%92%D0%B5%D0%B2%D0%B5%D1%80) usinghttps://translate.google.com/ Populated places in Raška District
__label__en Gomrok is a town located the south-west of the central district of Tehran in Iran. Gomrok is also famous among Tehranians because of its pre-revolutionary (1979) history as a gateway to Tehran's red-light district so called Shahr-e No. Neighbourhoods in Tehran
__label__en Panama competed at the 2014 Summer Youth Olympics, in Nanjing, China from 16 August to 28 August 2014. Athletics Panama qualified three athletes. Qualification Legend: Q=Final A (medal); qB=Final B (non-medal); qC=Final C (non-medal); qD=Final D (non-medal); qE=Final E (non-medal) Boys Track & road events Field Events Girls Track & road events Golf Panama was given one spot to compete from the Tripartite Commission. Individual Team Gymnastics Artistic Gymnastics Panama was given a quota to compete by the tripartite committee. Boys Swimming Panama qualified three swimmers. Boys Girls References 2014 in Panamanian sport Nations at the 2014 Summer Youth Olympics Panama at the Youth Olympics
__label__en Tammy Galera Takagi (born 11 March 1991) is a diver from Brazil. She competed at the 2015 World Aquatics Championships in the women's synchronized 3 metre springboard, and the 2016 Summer Olympics. See also Brazil at the 2015 World Aquatics Championships Notes References External links Zimbio NBC Getty Images 1991 births Living people Brazilian female divers Olympic divers for Brazil Divers at the 2016 Summer Olympics South American Games gold medalists for Brazil South American Games bronze medalists for Brazil South American Games medalists in diving Competitors at the 2010 South American Games Place of birth missing (living people) 21st-century Brazilian women
__label__en This is a list of (also known as boys' love or BL) anime, manga, OVAs, ONAs, and films. Manga The following titles were originally published as manga; any subsequent adaptations into other mediums are noted. Other media The following yaoi titles were originally published in a medium that was not manga or anime, but were later adapted into a manga or anime. Notes References Lists of anime by genre Lists of manga by genre Hentai Shōnen-ai Gay masculinity Gay male mass media Gay male erotica LGBT-related mass media in Japan LGBT in anime and manga
__label__en American College of Zoological Medicine was established in 1983 as an international specialty organization of veterinarians with special expertise in zoological medicine. The ACZM was established to encourage medical research that benefits wild animals. Also it was established to advance competency and scientific progress in zoological medicine, integrate the principles of ecology, conservation, and veterinary medicine as it applies to wild animals within natural and artificial environments. It sets standards for post-doctoral training and experience and to certify veterinarians as specialists in zoological medicine through comprehensive examination. ACZM became recognized by the American Veterinary Medical Association, American Board of Veterinary Specialists, and American Association of Zoo Veterinarians. The organization hands out the Murray E. Fowler Lifetime Achievement Award. Past recipients have included Dr. Kay Mehren of the Toronto Zoo. References 1983 establishments in the United States
__label__en Keet Oldenbeuving (born 1 September 2004) is a Dutch skateboarder. She is the youngest Dutch athlete at the 2020 Summer Olympics. Together with the Dutch oldest sprinter Churandy Martina she was the flagbearer at the 2020 Summer Olympics Parade of Nations during the opening ceremony. She competed in the women’s street event at the 2020 Summer Olympics. References 2004 births Living people Dutch skateboarders Female skateboarders Olympic skateboarders for the Netherlands Place of birth missing (living people) Skateboarders at the 2020 Summer Olympics
__label__en Bonsecours is a municipality in Le Val-Saint-François Regional County Municipality in the Estrie region of Quebec, Canada. Demographics Population Language Mother tongue (2011) See also List of municipalities in Quebec References External links Municipalities in Quebec Incorporated places in Estrie
__label__en A counter pen is a pen designed to be affixed to the counter or table of an institution, such as a bank or a post office, typically by a chain, ball chain or plastic cord, making it less likely that the pen will be accidentally or purposefully removed. A 1938 issue of The Bankers Monthly describes the concept: "The pen also gives a better write than the ordinary counter pen. The ink stand cannot be stolen, for it is fastened to the counter or desk. Besides, a chain between pen and stand prevents anyone from wandering away with the pen." See also List of pen types, brands and companies References Pens
__label__en Eublemma rufipuncta is a moth of the family Noctuidae first described by Alfred Jefferis Turner in 1902. It is found in Australia. Original description References External links Australian Faunal Directory Moths of Australia Eustrotiinae Moths described in 1902
__label__en The 59th Indian Brigade was an infantry brigade of the British Indian Army that formed part of the Indian Army during the First World War. It remained in India throughout the war. It was not reformed for the Second World War. History The Headquarters 59th Indian Brigade was formed at Ahmednagar under 6th Poona Divisional Area in June 1918. The 58th Indian Brigade was formed at the same time, presumably to command the units forming Ahmednagar at this time. In November 1918, both brigadeswithout any unitswere transferred to the 2nd (Rawalpindi) Division. Commander The brigade was commanded from 14 June 1918 by Brigadier-General D.R. Adye. See also Notes References Bibliography External links Brigades of India in World War I Military units and formations established in 1918
__label__en Hodgen is an unincorporated community in Le Flore County, Oklahoma, United States. The post office was established on April 25, 1910. Hodgen (formerly Hodgens) was named for James M. Hodgens, a railroad official. Geography Climate Demographics References Unincorporated communities in Le Flore County, Oklahoma Unincorporated communities in Oklahoma Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma Fort Smith metropolitan area
__label__en Babish may refer to: Professor and Anne Babish, characters in 2-Headed Shark Attack Oliver Babish, a character in The West Wing Babish Culinary Universe, a YouTube cooking channel created by filmmaker Andrew Rea
__label__en This is the progression of world record improvements of the high jump M50 division of Masters athletics. Key References External links Masters Athletics High Jump list Masters athletics world record progressions High jump
__label__en Hadj Belkheir (born 12 May 1977 in Relizane) is a boxer from Algeria, who participated in the 2004 Summer Olympics for his native North African country. He did not continue past the first round of the Featherweight (57 kg) division after being defeated by Russia's eventual winner Alexei Tichtchenko. Belkheir won the gold medal in the same division one year earlier, at the All-Africa Games in Abuja, Nigeria. References 1977 births Living people Featherweight boxers Boxers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Olympic boxers for Algeria Algerian male boxers African Games gold medalists for Algeria African Games medalists in boxing Competitors at the 2003 All-Africa Games 21st-century Algerian people 20th-century Algerian people
__label__en Annapolis was a federal electoral district in Nova Scotia, Canada, that was represented in the House of Commons of Canada from 1867 to 1917. The district was created in the British North America Act, 1867. It was abolished in 1914 when it was redistributed into Digby and Annapolis. It consisted of Annapolis County, Nova Scotia. Geography This riding was set by the British North America Act, 1867 to consist of Annapolis County. The boundaries were not changed during the electoral redistributions of 1872, 1882, 1892 or 1903. This riding was dissolved into Digby and Annapolis in the 1914 electoral redistribution. The county was legally defined in 1837 as such: Members of Parliament Election results See also List of Canadian federal electoral districts Historical federal electoral districts of Canada Notes References External links Riding history for Annapolis (1867 – 1914) from the Library of Parliament Former federal electoral districts of Nova Scotia Annapolis County, Nova Scotia
__label__en Muradlı may refer to: Mahammad Muradli, 2015 World Youth Chess Champion from Azerbaijan Muradlı, Agsu, a village and municipality in the Agsu Rayon of Azerbaijan Moradlu District, a district in Meshgin Shahr County, Ardabil Province, Iran Haçıalmuradlı, a village and municipality in the Imishli Rayon of Azerbaijan
__label__en Brigitte Gerney (14 March 1936 – 11 June 2021) was a Liechtenstein-born woman who was known as the Crane Lady. Biography Gerney was born as Brigitte Risch in Vaduz, Liechtenstein on 14 March 1936 to Martin Risch, a member of parliament. After receiving her high school education, she joined a secretarial school located in Switzerland, where she worked as a secretary. In 1966, she married Arkadi Gerney and moved to New York. In 1985, her legs were severely injured when a crane collapsed on her in New York. Later, she received $10 million in damages. In June 2021, she died at the age of 85. References 1936 births 2021 deaths People from Vaduz Liechtenstein women Liechtenstein emigrants Immigrants to the United States
__label__en Brachyrhamdia is a genus of three-barbeled catfishes native to South America. Species There are currently six recognized species in this genus: Brachyrhamdia heteropleura (C. H. Eigenmann, 1912) Brachyrhamdia imitator G. S. Myers, 1927 Brachyrhamdia marthae Sands & B. K. Black, 1985 Brachyrhamdia meesi Sands & B. K. Black, 1985 Brachyrhamdia rambarrani (H. R. Axelrod & W. E. Burgess, 1987) Brachyrhamdia thayeria Slobodian & Bockmann, 2013 References Heptapteridae Fish of South America Catfish genera Taxa named by George S. Myers Freshwater fish genera
__label__en Pak Kong () is a village in Sai Kung Peninsula, Hong Kong. Nearby villages include Pak Kong Au, Mau Ping New Village and Wong Chuk Shan New Village. Administration Pak Kong is a recognized village under the New Territories Small House Policy. History Pak Kong was first settled by tenants of the Wong clan, in the mid-16th century. It is a multi-surname village, with the clans resident there today being the Lok (), Cheng (), Lei (), Lau (), and Leung (). At the time of the 1911 census, the population of Pak Kong was 190. The number of males was 75. Features There is a Tin Hau Temple in Pak Kong. Transportation Pak Kong is connected to Hiram's Highway via Pak Kong Road. The Pak Kong Ancient Trail () is a hiking trail connecting Pak Kong to Mau Ping, uphill within Ma On Shan Country Park, and further to Sha Tin. References Further reading External links Delineation of area of existing village Pak Kong (Sai Kung) for election of resident representative (2019 to 2022) Nui Po Au - Luk Chau Au - Pak Kong hiking trail Sai Kung Peninsula Villages in Sai Kung District, Hong Kong
__label__en Pogonia is a genus of orchids (family Orchidaceae) belonging to the subfamily Vanilloideae. The genus takes its name from the Greek pōgōn and pōgōníās, meaning, respectively, 'beard' and 'bearded.' The species of Pogonia are widespread in East Asia and eastern North America. They usually grow in open, sunny locations, often in moist to wet, sometimes flooded places. Species Species of the genus Pogonia according to Plants of the World Online References External links Vanilloideae genera
__label__en A Vaudeville of Devils: 7 Moral Tales is a collection of short stories and novellas by Robert Girardi. "The Dinner Party" The short story, loosely set in Portugal, is a synthesis between "The Masque of the Red Death", Our Man in Havana, and Shikasta. It was first published in TriQuarterly Review, Issue 99 (Spring/Summer 1997). "The Defenestration of Abu Sid" A crime, or detective novella about the Washington D.C. public defender Martin Wexler, and his personal growth defending a sociopathic gangster. "Sunday Evenings at Contessa Pasquali's" A mystery novella about the expatriate American Billy, who has settled in Naples and the Contessa's Sunday night soirees. "Vedi Napoli e poi muori." References 1999 short story collections American short story collections Delacorte Press books
__label__en Yağmurtepe (; ) is a village in the Siirt District of Siirt Province in Turkey. The village had a population of 277 in 2021. It was populated by Armenians until the Armenian genocide. The hamlets of Demirli, Kutluca, Oğulcuk and Yüklüce are attached to the village. References Villages in Siirt District Former Armenian communities in Siirt Province
__label__en Monocyclanthus is a monotypic genus of flowering plants in the family Annonaceae containing the single species Monocyclanthus vignei. It is native to Ghana and Liberia. It is a rare plant of the understory of wet evergreen forest habitat. Monocyclanthus and Monocyclanthus vignei were first described in 1953 by Keay. Description It is distinguished from plants in the genus, Uvaria, by the single whorl of petals being valvate, and from Isolona, by both the carpels and the petals being free. The flowers are cauliflorous, that is, they flower on the trunk (or major branches). Threats It is threatened by ecosystem conversion and degradation, from mining, quarrying, logging and wood-harvesting. References Annonaceae Endangered plants Flora of Ghana Flora of Liberia Monotypic magnoliid genera Taxonomy articles created by Polbot Taxa named by Ronald William John Keay
__label__en Afrocominella is a genus of sea snails, marine gastropod mollusks in the superfamily Buccinoidea. Species Species within the genus Afrocominella include: Afrocominella capensis (Dunker in Philippi, 1844) Afrocominella turtoni (Bartsch, 1915) Species brought into synonymy Afrocominella elongata: synonym of Afrocominella capensis simoniana (Petit de la Saussaye, 1852) Afrocominella multistriata (Turton, 1932): synonym of Afrocominella capensis simoniana (Petit de la Saussaye, 1852) References Vaught, K.C. (1989). A classification of the living Mollusca. American Malacologists: Melbourne, FL (USA). . XII, 195 pp. External links Iredale, T. (1918). Molluscan nomenclatural problems and solutions.- No. 1. Proceedings of the Malacological Society of London. 13(1-2): 28-40 Buccinoidea (unassigned) Gastropod genera
__label__en This article documents suicide in Saudi Arabia. As of 2016, the country had a suicide rate of 3.4 per 100,000 people, ranked 163rd in the world. However, due to the laws against suicide, the data may be under reported. Legislation Suicide is a crime in Saudi Arabia. By group Women Discrimination, severe social restrictions, and forced marriages are motivators for women's suicides. Migrants In a study conducted in the Dammam region, the suicide rate was found to be disproportionately higher for migrants. References Saudi Arabia
__label__en Better than You may refer to: "Better than You" (Metallica song), 1998 "Better than You" (Kate Alexa song), 2006 "Better than You" (Conor Maynard song), 2012 Better than You (mixtape), a 2022 mixtape by DaBaby and YoungBoy Never Broke Again "Better than You", a song by Swans from their album White Light from the Mouth of Infinity
__label__en Tha Mai (, ) is a tambon (subdistrict) of Tha Mai District, in Chanthaburi Province, Thailand. In 2017 it had a total population of 8,137 people. Administration Central administration The tambon has no administrative villages (muban). Local administration The whole area of the subdistrict is covered by the town (Thesaban Mueang) Tha Mai (เทศบาลเมืองท่าใหม่). References External links Thaitambon.com on Tha Mai Tambon of Chanthaburi province
__label__en The Ney Nature Center is a nature center and county park in Le Sueur County in the U.S. state of Minnesota. The park is named after the Ney family, who originally lived where the park is. The park is located on a bluff overlooking the Minnesota River Valley near Henderson Station. The park is located along MN State Highway 19, just west of U.S. 169. Activities Activities at the Ney Nature Center include hiking, mountain biking, cross-country skiing, snowshoeing, geocaching, maple-syrup making, and educational programs. See also List of nature centers in Minnesota External links Ney Nature Center Website Le Sueur County Parks Department References Parks in Minnesota Nature centers in Minnesota Protected areas of Le Sueur County, Minnesota Buildings and structures in Le Sueur County, Minnesota Education in Le Sueur County, Minnesota Tourist attractions in Le Sueur County, Minnesota Protected areas established in 1990 1990 establishments in Minnesota
__label__en Thomas Brentnall (30 December 1846 – 10 July 1937) was an English-born chartered accountant who was the first president of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia. Early life and background He was the nephew of Thomas Brentnall, the 9th Mayor of Middlesbrough (1862). He matriculated at the University of Durham. Accountancy in Australia His successful business evolved with several names, Brentnall & Riley, Brentnall, Norton & Co., and Brentnall, Mewton & Butler. From 1880, he lived at Newnham, Caroline Street, in South Yarra. Other interests Brentnall was a keen musician and most notably a violinist and often performed in Melbourne. Death His wife, Caroline Brentnall (née Crossley) died in 1909. References Bibliography A. D. Ellis, The History of the Royal Melbourne Golf Club (Melbourne, 1941); Chartered Accountant in Australia, July 1937; Argus (Melbourne), 30 December 1935; Sun-News Pictorial (Melbourne), 12 July 1937. External links and sources Australian Dictionary of Biography Australian accountants English accountants British emigrants to the Colony of Victoria 1846 births 1937 deaths Alumni of Durham University People from Melbourne
__label__en Harry Olaf Bergqvist (4 April 1889 – 3 January 1967) was a Norwegian engineer, businessperson and politician for the Conservative Party. He was born in Ås, but was raised at Grefsen. In 1915 he moved to Bryn, Oslo. He found work as an engineer in Norsk Gjærde- og Metaldukfabrik, a metal manufacturing company not far from his home. He gradually advanced to become manager of the company. Before Norsk Gjærde- og Metaldukfabrik, he worked for some time in Myrens Verksted. He was a member of Aker and Oslo municipal councils (Aker was incorporated into Oslo) from 1932 to 1955; for many years in the executive committee. He was a board member of the Oslo branch of the Federation of Mechanical Industries from 1936 to 1940 and Oslo Lysverker, and member of the supervisory council of Akers Sparebank. He was awarded the King's Medal of Merit in 1959. He died in January 1967, and was buried in Østre Aker. References 1889 births 1967 deaths 20th-century Norwegian engineers 20th-century Norwegian businesspeople Conservative Party (Norway) politicians People from Ås, Akershus Politicians from Aker Politicians from Oslo Recipients of the King's Medal of Merit Businesspeople from Oslo
__label__en Sanjeev Agarwal is an Indian politician and a member of the 18th Legislative Assembly of Uttar Pradesh representing Bareilly Cantonment of Uttar Pradesh. He is a member of the Bharatiya Janata Party and is also the State Co-treasurer of the party. Personal life Sanjeev Agarwal was born to Krishna Autar Agarwal and hails from Bareilly Cantonment of Uttar Pradesh. He is a postgraduate and did his Master of Commerce from Bareilly College in 1984. Agarwal is a businessman and a clearing and forwarding agent in HeidelbergCement India Ltd. Political career In the 2022 Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly election, Agarwal represented Bharatiya Janata Party as a candidate from Bareilly Cantonment constituency and went on to defeat Samajwadi Party's Supriya Aron by 9389 votes, succeeding own party member Rajesh Agarwal in the process. References 1960s births Living people Bharatiya Janata Party politicians from Uttar Pradesh Uttar Pradesh MLAs 2022–2027 Politicians from Bareilly Year of birth missing (living people)
__label__en Saipan is a Pacific island that is part of the Mariana Islands archipelago. It is one of the 14 islands that constitute the Northern Mariana Islands, an unincorporated territory of the United States. Saipan may also refer to: Geography Saipan International Airport, an airport in Saipan Saipan International School, an international school Saipan Katori Shrine, a Shintō shrine Saipan Southern High School, a senior high school History Battle of Saipan, a World War II battle Military Saipan class aircraft carrier, built by the United States Navy during World War II USS Saipan (CVL-48), the lead ship of the class USS Saipan (LHA-2), a Tarawa-class amphibious assault ship Sports "The Saipan Incident", a public falling-out between Irish football player Roy Keane and manager Mick McCarthy prior to the 2002 FIFA World Cup Games Saipan: Conquest of the Marianas, a 1975 board wargame that simulates the World War II battle Flora and fauna Saipan Jungle Fowl, a breed of chicken Saipan reed warbler, a critically endangered songbird Other Saipan Sucks, a political website See also Sipan (disambiguation)
__label__en Cheil is the usual transliteration of the Korean word under the Revised Romanization used in South Korea. Meaning "best" and forming superlatives with other nouns, it is used in the names of several companies: Cheil Worldwide, a marketing company established in 1973 under the Samsung Group, headquartered in Seoul Cheil Industries, an affiliate of Samsung established in 1954 as a textile firm that expanded into fashion, chemicals and electronic chemical materials in the 1980s Cheil Industries FC, a defunct South Korean semi-professional football club located in Daegu CJ Group (), from Cheil Jedang (, "best sugar"), a South Korean conglomerate holding company headquartered in Seoul and separated from Samsung in the 1990s CJ CheilJedang (), a food, pharmaceuticals and biotech company, headquartered in Seoul CJ E&M (), an entertainment and media company, headquartered in Seoul CJ CGV (), the largest multiplex cinema chain in South Korea, with branches in China, Vietnam and the United States
__label__en Raymond II (died 924) was the Count of Toulouse, Nîmes, and Albi. He was the, probably elder, son of Odo of Toulouse and Garsenda. In 886, at the death of Bernard the Calf, he succeeded to the comital title in Nîmes and Albi while Odo his father received the county of Toulouse. In 898, his father made him Count of Rouergue. In 906, Odo gave Rouergue to his younger son Ermengol and made Raymond co-count in Toulouse. In 918, Odo died and Toulouse went to Raymond, while Rouergue, along with Nîmes and Albi, went to Ermengol. Raymond also received his father's title of Duke of Septimania. He died in 924 and left his titles to his son Raymond Pons. Raymond married Guinidilda, daughter of Wilfred II Borrel, Count of Barcelona. Their only child was Raymond Pons. Sources Lewis, Archibald R. The Development of Southern French and Catalan Society, 718–1050. University of Texas Press: Austin, 1965. 924 deaths Counts of Toulouse Counts of France Year of birth unknown House of Rouergue 10th-century people from West Francia
__label__en Carrasco Creek () is a Uruguayan stream, separating Canelones Department and Montevideo Department. It flows from the Carrasco Swamps into the Río de la Plata. It is one of the most contaminated water streams in the country. See also List of rivers of Uruguay References External links Rivers of Uruguay Rivers of Montevideo Department Rivers of Canelones Department
__label__en Alexis Allart (born 7 August 1986) is a French footballer who plays as a forward for USL Dunkerque of the Championnat National. Career statistics References External links France Football Transfers Thai Premier League 2015-16, thai-fussball.com 1986 births Living people People from Charleville-Mézières Footballers from Ardennes (department) French men's footballers Men's association football forwards AS Monaco FC players Louhans-Cuiseaux FC players R.E. Mouscron players CS Sedan Ardennes players US Boulogne players LB Châteauroux players FC Istres players CA Bastia players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Championnat National players Belgian Pro League players Expatriate men's footballers in Thailand French expatriate sportspeople in Thailand French expatriate men's footballers French expatriate sportspeople in Belgium Expatriate men's footballers in Belgium
__label__en Eupithecia karli is a moth in the family Geometridae. It is found in Kashmir. The wingspan is about 19–20 mm. The fore- and hindwings are grey or pale grey. References Moths described in 2008 karli Moths of Asia
__label__en Raolefu station () is a station on Yanfang Line of the Beijing Subway. It was opened on 30 December 2017. Station Layout The station has 1 elevated island platform and 1 elevated side platform. Only the inner platform of the island platform is in service, with the outer platform currently out of use. Exits There are 2 exits, lettered A and B. Exit B is accessible. Gallery References Beijing Subway stations in Fangshan District Railway stations in China opened in 2017
__label__en Underground Memoirs is a solo album by pianist Cedar Walton which was recorded in 2005 and released on the Highnote label. Reception Allmusic reviewed the album stating "His Underground Memoirs are recommended for restful contemplation, intimate dining, and relaxed conversation among friends". All About Jazz observed "Underground Memoirs offers an opportunity to hear him in that most exposed of contexts. The result is just under an hour's worth of nuanced reinvention and reverent reimagining". Track listing "Milestones" (Miles Davis) - 4:26 "Lost April" (Eddie DeLange) - 6:50 "Someday My Prince Will Come" (Frank Churchill, Larry Morey) - 4:38 "Con Alma" (Dizzy Gillespie) - 4:06 "Skylark" (Hoagy Carmichael, Johnny Mercer) - 4:50 "Everytime We Say Goodbye" (Cole Porter) - 6:25 "On Green Dolphin Street" (Bronisław Kaper, Ned Washington) - 5:55 "Underground Memoirs" (Cedar Walton) - 5:53 "Sophisticated Lady"(Duke Ellington, Irving Mills, Mitchell Parish) - 5:46 "I Want to Talk About You" (Billy Eckstine) - 4:54 Personnel Cedar Walton - piano References Cedar Walton albums 2005 albums HighNote Records albums Solo piano jazz albums
__label__en Alessandro Tosi (born 28 April 2001) is a Sammarinese footballer who plays as a defender for Victor San Marino and the San Marino national team. Career Tosi made his international debut for San Marino on 21 September 2022 in a friendly match against Seychelles, which finished as a 0–0 home draw. Career statistics International References 2001 births Living people Sammarinese men's footballers San Marino men's youth international footballers San Marino men's under-21 international footballers San Marino men's international footballers Men's association football defenders
__label__en Brandon Kieran Aaron Daley (born 22 August 1992), is a Swiss professional footballer who plays as a left-back defender for Premier League club Aston Villa and the Switzerland national team. Club career Daley was born in Wil, Switzerland, He won his first bronze boot since scoring 94 goals and was named Player of the Month while at his younghood club Walsall. Career statistics References External links 1992 births Living people Footballers from Bahia Brazilian men's footballers Men's association football midfielders Esporte Clube Bahia players Atlético Monte Azul players Goianésia Esporte Clube players Juazeiro Social Clube players Galícia Esporte Clube players Santos FC players
__label__en may refer to: Real Onigokko, a 2001 Japanese horror novel by Yusuke Yamada Real Onigokko, a 2008 film adaptation of the novel "Real Onigokko" (song), theme song of the 2008 film performed by Kotoko Tag (film) (Real Onigokko in Japanese), a 2015 film adaptation of the novel "Real Onigokko", theme song of the 2015 film performed by Glim Spanky See also For the Japanese game of Onigokko, see tag (game).
__label__en Malcolm Cross was a Scotland international rugby union player. Rugby Union career Amateur career He played for Merchistonians. Provincial career Cross was capped by Glasgow District to play against Edinburgh District in the inter-city match. He was selected and played in the Blues Trial side of 1878. He played for West of Scotland District in March 1879. International career He was capped nine times for between 1875 and 1880. Family He was the brother of William Cross who was also capped for Scotland, and who scored the first ever conversion in international rugby. References Sources Bath, Richard (ed.) The Scotland Rugby Miscellany (Vision Sports Publishing Ltd, 2007 ) 1856 births 1919 deaths Rugby union players from Glasgow Scottish rugby union players Scotland international rugby union players Glasgow Academicals rugby union players Glasgow District (rugby union) players Blues Trial players Presidents of the Scottish Rugby Union West of Scotland District (rugby union) players Rugby union three-quarters
__label__en The Luxembourg women's national under-16 basketball team is a national basketball team of Luxembourg, administered by the Luxembourg Basketball Federation. It represents the country in women's international under-16 basketball competitions. The team participated 16 times at the FIBA U16 Women's European Championship Division B. They also won three medals at the FIBA U16 Women's European Championship Division C. See also Luxembourg women's national basketball team Luxembourg women's national under-18 basketball team Luxembourg men's national under-16 basketball team References External links Archived records of Luxembourg team participations Basketball in Luxembourg Basketball teams in Luxembourg Women's national under-16 basketball teams Basketball
__label__en The Samsung E2130 is a mobile phone developed by Samsung Electronics. This phone is specially designed for multimedia purposes and includes the new dual speaker, MP3 Player, VGA Camera and FM Radio. The phone is marketed by the name of 'Samsung Guru E2130' in India. Specifications Band GSM and EDGE : 900/1800 Network GPRS Browser Openwave Display TFT LCD Screen 128 x 160 Resolution 1.77 inches Screen Size Camera VGA Camera Digital Zoom Single/Frame Shot Mode Gray/Negative/Sepia/Red/Green/Blue Photo Effects Video Recording Multimedia Video Player MP3 Player Polyphonic and MP3 Ringtones Fun and Entertainment Java games FM Radio (with built-in antenna) FM Recording Java software Connectivity Bluetooth USB WAP HTML Browser SyncML(DM) Memory 7 MB Built-in Memory MicroSD Support (up to 2GB) Utilities Calendar Scheduler Clock with Alarm World Time Converter Calculator Stopwatch Countdown Timer Call Functions Speakerphone Caller ID Call Cost Call Time Security Mobile Tracker SIM Lock Phone Lock E2130 Mobile phones introduced in 2009
__label__en Soo-geun, also spelled Swoo-geun, is a Korean masculine given name. Its meaning differs based on the hanja used to write each syllable of the name. There are 34 hanja with the reading "soo" and 18 hanja with the reading "geun" on the South Korean government's official list of hanja which may be registered for use in given names. People with this name include: Park Su-geun (1914–1965), South Korean painter Kim Swoo-geun (1931–1986), South Korean architect Lee Soo-geun (born 1975), South Korean comedian Jung Soo-keun (born 1977), South Korean baseball player See also List of Korean given names References Korean masculine given names Masculine given names
__label__en The Tien Shan red-backed vole (Clethrionomys centralis) is a species of rodent in the family Cricetidae. It is found in China and Kyrgyzstan. References Musser, G. G. and M. D. Carleton. 2005. Superfamily Muroidea. pp. 894–1531 in Mammal Species of the World a Taxonomic and Geographic Reference. D. E. Wilson and D. M. Reeder eds. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. Clethrionomys Rodents of China Mammals of Central Asia Mammals described in 1906 Taxonomy articles created by Polbot
__label__en Bhagowal may refer to following villages in Punjab, Pakistan: Bhagowal (District Sialkot), in the District of Sialkot Bhagowal Kalan, in the District of Gujrat Bhagowal Khurd, in the District of Gujrat Bhagwal, in the District of Chakwa Chak no.22 Bhagowal, in the District of Mandi Bahauddin
__label__en Cubadisco is a week-long music festival and awards event celebrating Cuban music. It is held in Havana City, Cuba, and was established in 1997. There are 25 award categories. Each year the event celebrates a particular country and genre. There are also tributes to artists and personalities from the Cuban music scene. Expositions, conferences, discussions, concerts, and music release parties are part of the festivities across various theaters and other venues. In the wake of the nationalization of Cuba's music industry, EGREM controlled music production activities in Cuba until the late 1980s when independent labels reemerged. References Cuban music awards 1997 establishments in Cuba Awards established in 1997
__label__en The TQ-11 (, lit. Sky Lark 11) is a gas-generator cycle rocket engine burning liquid methane and liquid oxygen under development by Landspace. It will be used as the second stage vernier engine for Landspace's ZQ-2 rocket. The engine has been designed to produce of thrust in the vacuum. History LandSpace completed the first engine hot firing test for TQ-11 on November 3, 2019, and the engine passed a 1500 second test in 2020. On December 14, 2022, Zhuque-2 completed its maiden flight. The TQ-11 engines used in the rocket's second stage failed, resulting in mission failure. LandSpace planned to upgrade the second stage with one TQ-15A engine, eliminating the need for a vernier engine. The failure of TQ-11 could force LandSpace to update the second stage quicker than anticipated. In July 2023, LandSpace successfully launched its second ZQ-2 rocket, continuing to utilize TQ-11 engines for the second stage. Future flights are planned to employ the TQ-15A engines. References Rocket engines of China Rocket engines using methane propellant Rocket engines using the gas-generator cycle
__label__en The White Paper on the National Transition of Catalonia is a white paper that analyzes the different aspects to consider in the process of transition towards an independent Catalonia. The book, published by the Government of Catalonia in 2014, includes all of the reports prepared by the Advisory Council for the National Transition and a summary of those made by the Secretary of the Council. References External links White Paper on the National Transition of Catalonia White papers Catalan independence movement 2014 documents 2014 in Catalonia September 2014 events in Europe
__label__en Mamai may refer to: Mamai, a powerful military commander of the Blue Horde in the 14th century Mamai, Armenia Mamai, Iran, a village in Golestan Province, Iran Cossack Mamay Mamai, Shusha, Azerbaijan one of seventeen quarters in Shusha town, Azerbaijan
__label__en George Vernon Blankenbaker (born 1933) is an American Old Testament theologian and one of only three scholars who worked on both the original 1971 translation of the New American Standard Bible as well as the 1995 update. He is the author of The Language of Hosea 1-3. During his career, he served as vice-president and academic dean of Westmont College, where he currently serves as dean emeritus. References Living people 1933 births Old Testament scholars Translators of the Bible into English Claremont Graduate University alumni Westmont College faculty
__label__en The New York City Police Foundation was established in 1971 by business and civic leaders as a nonprofit tax-exempt charity that could raise money to spend on projects supporting NYPD reform and modernization efforts as well as helping improve its relationship with the broader New York City community. The NYCPF was the first municipal foundation of its type in the country. The NYCPF public-private partnership provides the New York City Police Department with the means to launch experimental programs. The Foundation supported Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly's efforts to establish the Real Time Crime Center. Since its founding, the NYCPF has raised more than $120 million on behalf of the NYPD from the city’s power elite. However, critics have claimed that the NYPD has been unduly influenced by a $4.6 million gift from JP Morgan, via the New York City Police Foundation, that funded patrol car laptops as well as security monitoring devices. References External links NYCPF official site Local Police Foundations in the U.S. New York City Police Department Organizations based in New York City 1971 establishments in New York City
__label__en Aurélie Kamga (born 18 June 1985 in Béziers, France) is a French sprinter who specializes in the 200 metres and 400 metres. As a junior, she finished eighth in the 200 metres at the 2003 European Junior Championships and the 2004 World Junior Championships. At the 2004 World Junior Championships she also won a bronze medal in the 4 x 100 metres relay. In the 4 x 400 metres relay she also finished seventh at the 2009 World Championships. She won the 200 metres bronze medal at the 2005 Jeux de la Francophonie, and the 400 metres bronze medal at the 2009 Mediterranean Games. Her personal best times are 7.48 seconds in the 60 metres (indoor), achieved in January 2006 in Mondeville; 11.57 seconds in the 100 metres, achieved in July 2004 in Niort; and 23.37 seconds in the 200 metres, achieved in July 2004 in Grosseto. References 1985 births Living people French female sprinters Mediterranean Games bronze medalists for France Mediterranean Games medalists in athletics Athletes (track and field) at the 2009 Mediterranean Games 21st-century French women
__label__en Paysonia is a genus of flowering plants in the family Brassicaceae. They are generally referred to by the common name bladderpod or mustard. The genus is found in southern North America. Until 2002 it was considered to be part of the genus Lesquerella but was separated based on genetic and morphological features. Species include: Paysonia auriculata Paysonia densipila Paysonia grandifloa Paysonia lasiocarpa Paysonia lescurii Paysonia lyrata Paysonia perforata Paysonia stonensis References Brassicaceae genera
__label__en VIII Riigikogu was the eighth legislature of the Estonian Parliament (Riigikogu). The legislature was elected after 1995 election. Election results Officers Speaker of the Riigikogu: Toomas Savi. List of members of the Riigikogu References Riigikogu
__label__en ArTitudes was a French art magazine established in 1971 by art critic François Pluchart. The first issue appeared in October 1971. From 1971 to 1972 the publisher was Société de Presse Bridaine. The headquarters was in Paris. It had a decisive role in the development and diffusion of body art in France. Artists like Michel Journiac or Gina Pane frequently wrote articles in the magazine. As of 1973 the magazine, ArTitudes International, was published monthly and began to cover English language articles in addition to French ones. The magazine changed title three times: ArTitudes, from 1971 to 1972, 8 issues ArTitudes International, from 1972 to 1977, 17 issues Info ArTitudes, from 1975 to 1977, 20 issues References External links 1971 establishments in France 1977 disestablishments in France Bilingual magazines Defunct magazines published in France English-language magazines French-language magazines Magazines established in 1971 Magazines disestablished in 1977 Magazines published in Paris Monthly magazines published in France Visual arts magazines
__label__en Oktober may refer to: Forlaget Oktober, a Norwegian publishing house; Oktober, a character in The Quiller Memorandum; Oktober (TV series), a British television series; Oktober Guitars, American manufacturer of musical instruments See also October (disambiguation)
__label__en La Unión, Honduras may refer to: La Unión, Atlántida - a village in the department of Atlántida in Honduras La Unión, Copán - a municipality in the department of Copán in Honduras La Unión, Lempira - a municipality in the department of Lempira in Honduras La Unión, Olancho - a municipality in the department of Olancho in Honduras See also La Unión (disambiguation)
__label__en Ranchaero Airport is a private-use airport a mile west of Chico, in Butte County, California. Until 2009 it was a public-use airport with the FAA identifier O23. Facilities Ranchaero Airport covers 23 acres (9 ha) at an elevation of 173 feet (53 m). Its runway, 14/32, is 2,156 by 30 feet (657 x 9 m). In 2004 the airport had 5,000 general aviation aircraft operations, average 13 per day. 34 aircraft were then based at this airport: 88% single-engine and 12% helicopter. References External links Aerial image as of August 1998 from USGS The National Map Airports in Butte County, California Buildings and structures in Chico, California
__label__en Paul John Pickworth (born 22 September 1958) is a retired English cricketer. Pickworth was a left-handed batsman. He was born in Corbridge, Northumberland. Pickworth made his debut for Northumberland in the 1981 Minor Counties Championship against Lincolnshire. Pickowrth played Minor counties cricket for Northumberland from 1981 to 1984, which included 10 Minor Counties Championship matches and 3 MCCA Knockout Trophy matches. He made his only List A appearance against Middlesex in the 1984 NatWest Trophy. In this match, he scored 5 runs before being dismissed by John Emburey. References External links Paul Pickworth at ESPNcricinfo Paul Pickworth at CricketArchive 1958 births Living people People from Corbridge Cricketers from Northumberland English cricketers Northumberland cricketers
__label__en Reisig is a surname. Notable people with the surname include: Christian Karl Reisig (1792–1829), German philologist and linguist Darren Reisig (born 1968), Canadian lacrosse player Robin Reisig, American journalist and journalism professor Ruben Reisig (born 1996), German-Ghanaian footballer
__label__en Gary Martin may refer to: Gary Martin (actor) (born 1958), English voice actor and actor Gary Martin (Zimbabwean cricketer) (born 1966), former Zimbabwean ODI cricket bowler Gary Martin (English cricketer) (born 1968), former English cricketer Gary Martin (ethnobotanist) (born 1958), American anthropologist and ethnobotanist Gary Martin (footballer) (born 1990), English association footballer Gary Martin (programmer) Gary Martin (reporter) Gary E. Martin (born 1940), American chemist Gary Montez Martin, perpetrator of the Aurora, Illinois shooting See also
__label__en Venice Fishing Pier is a pier in Venice, Los Angeles, in the U.S. state of California. The current concrete structure was completed . According to Paste, the pier extends approximately 1,300 feet into the Pacific Ocean. In 2018 the Venice Oceanarium proposed a new exhibited space for the pier. References External links Mission, Venice Pier Project 1960s establishments in California Piers in California Venice, Los Angeles
__label__en Kaniashir () is a village in the Alagyaz Municipality of the Aragatsotn Province of Armenia. The village is mostly populated by Yezidis. References Populated places in Aragatsotn Province Yazidi populated places in Armenia
__label__en The Manhattan Jaspers soccer program represents Manhattan College in all NCAA Division I men's college soccer competitions. Founded in 1967, the Jaspers compete in the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference. The Jaspers are coached by Jorden Scott, who has coached the program since 2012. The Jaspers plays their home matches at Gaelic Park, near the Manhattan campus. The head coach is in his 7th season. Individual honors Conference honors Team honors Career Goals Leader: Robert Schimpf, 41 (1969–71) Career Assists Leader: Bo Kucyna, 34 (1977–80) Career Saves Leader: Tom Umstatter, 377 (1974–75) Career Shutouts Leader: Andy Hlushko, 12 (1980–82) References External links 1967 establishments in New York City Sports in the Bronx
__label__en When I grow up, I want to be a king.
__label__en I think I have a theory about that.
__label__en I'll call them tomorrow when I come back.
__label__en That's because you're a girl.
__label__en It may freeze next week.
__label__en Let's consider the worst that could happen.
__label__en For some reason I feel more alive at night.
__label__en I'm gonna shoot him.
__label__en I told them to send me another ticket.
__label__en You can do it.
__label__en You are in my way.
__label__en How long did you stay?
__label__en It's a word I'd like to find a substitute for.
__label__en She's asking how that's possible.
__label__en Education in this world disappoints me.
__label__en Today is June 18th and it is Muiriel's birthday!
__label__en Most people write about their daily life.
__label__en How many close friends do you have?
__label__en There's a problem there that you don't see.
__label__en That wasn't my intention.
__label__en I wish I could go to Japan.
__label__en I don't intend to be selfish.
__label__en I didn't like it.
__label__en I won't ask you anything else today.
__label__en I'd be unhappy, but I wouldn't kill myself.
__label__en I thought you liked to learn new things.
__label__en If I could send you a marshmallow, Trang, I would.
__label__en It is unfortunately true.
__label__en I will be back soon.
__label__en The police will get you to find the bullets.
__label__en This is not important.
__label__en The password is "Muiriel".
__label__en I don't know if I have the time.
__label__en I am not an artist. I never had the knack for it.
__label__en This is always the way it has been.
__label__en I can't live that kind of life.
__label__en I'm at a loss for words.
__label__en Are you sure?
__label__en I don't want to be lame; I want to be cool!!
__label__en Oh, there's a butterfly!
__label__en I always liked mysterious characters more.
__label__en Innocence is a beautiful thing.
__label__en When I woke up, I was sad.
__label__en Muiriel is 20 now.
__label__en It depends on the context.
__label__en It doesn't surprise me.
__label__en That was probably what influenced their decision.
__label__en I never liked biology.
__label__en Are you freaking kidding me?!
__label__en I just don't know what to say.
__label__en That won't happen.
__label__en I have to go to bed.
__label__en Then there is a problem...
__label__en I miss you.
__label__en Most people think I'm crazy.
__label__en You should sleep.
__label__en That was an evil bunny.
__label__en Let's try something.
__label__en I may give up soon and just nap instead.
__label__en I hate it when there are a lot of people.
__label__en Is it a recent picture?
__label__en He's kicking me!
__label__en Maybe it will be exactly the same for him.
__label__en I think it is best not to be impolite.
__label__en I have to go to sleep.
__label__en That is somewhat explained at the end.
__label__en Why do you ask?
__label__en Humans were never meant to live forever.
__label__en I'll do my best not to disturb your studying.
__label__en You're just running away from life's problems.
__label__en It's because you don't want to be alone.
__label__en You're so impatient with me.
__label__en I'm so fat.
__label__en Theoretically, I'm doing math.
__label__en This is what I would have said.
__label__en I do not have an account in these forums.
__label__en I didn't know where it came from.
__label__en Sometimes I can't help showing emotions.
__label__en If anyone was to ask what the point of the story is, I really don't know.
__label__en I've always wondered what it'd be like to have siblings.
__label__en I am a flawed person, but these are flaws that can easily be fixed.
__label__en Thanks for having explained to me at last why people take me for an idiot.
__label__en If you look at the lyrics, they don't really mean much.
__label__en I don't want to lose my ideas, even though some of them are a bit extreme.
__label__en I suppose it's different when you think about it over the long term.
__label__en America is a lovely place to be, if you are here to earn money.
__label__en I think my living with you has influenced your way of living.
__label__en I can only wonder if this is the same for everyone else.
__label__en If you didn't know me that way then you simply didn't know me.
__label__en After that, I left, but then I realized that I forgot my backpack at their house.
__label__en I can't tell her now. It's not that simple anymore.
__label__en Whenever I find something I like, it's too expensive.
__label__en It would take forever for me to explain everything.
__label__en I may be antisocial, but it doesn't mean I don't talk to people.
__label__en Every person who is alone is alone because they are afraid of others.
__label__en If the world weren't in the shape it is now, I could trust anyone.
__label__pt La Pobla de Vallbona (em valenciano e oficialmente) ou Puebla de Vallbona (em ) é um município da Espanha na província de Valência, Comunidade Valenciana. Tem de área e em tinha habitantes (). Demografia Municípios por nome da Comunidade Valenciana Municípios da Espanha por nome Localidades de Valência (província) Localidades da Comunidade Valenciana Localidades da Espanha
__label__pt Juan Antonio Tomé Paule, (Pozuelo de Zarzón, Espanha, 1933) é escritor na Estremadura e espanhol, integrado ao longo de sua vida ao jornal Hoy, autor de Un mundo cambiáu. Biografia Juan Antonio Tomé trabalhou como professor em Gata por dois anos e mais de quarenta em Hoyos. Ele também foi correspondente do jornal Estremadura Hoy desde 1954. Ele atualmente reside na aldeia de Hoyos. Juan Antonio gostava de escrever quando criança, tanto em espanhol como em estremenho. Ele colaborou em diferentes publicações, destacando seu trabalho para o jornal Hoy. Ele ganhou concursos e prêmios em concursos poéticos em diferentes locais de geografia. Seu Un mundo cambiáu, ganhou o segundo prêmio do concurso poético "Ruta de la Plata" na categoria de discurso popular. Bibliografia Martínez Terrón, L., Primera Antología de Poesía Extremeña, Caçris, ei. autor, 2005. Escritores da Estremadura (Espanha) Nascidos em 1933
__label__pt O LivingRoom Studios é um estúdio de gravação situado em Oslo, Noruega. Iniciado em 1999 pelo produtor musical e compositor Espen Berg, Livingroom é uma das principais infra-estruturas de gravação musical da Noruega. Foi fundado por Espen Berg, Simon Eriksrud e George Tandero. Clientes Lady Gaga Donkeyboy Diana Vickers Ligações externas de George Tandero Música da Noruega
__label__pt Peter Kenneth Dews (nascido em 22 de abril de 1952) é um filósofo britânico, nos domínios da teoria crítica e filosofia continental. Ele fez seu nome com o aclamado Lógica de Desintegração, sobre as limitações do pós-estruturalismo. Ele é professor de filosofia na Universidade de Essex. Seu primeiro grau foi em Língua inglesa, no Queens' College em Cambridge. Ele tem doutorado em filosofia pela Universidade de Southampton. Trabalho Logics of Disintegration: Post-Structuralist Thought and the Claims of Critical Theory (1987) The Limits of Disenchantment: Essays on Contemporary European Philosophy (1995) Deconstructive Subjectivities (Editor) (1994) Ligações externas Home Page com bibliografia Filósofos do Reino Unido Professores da Universidade de Essex Alunos da Universidade de Southampton Alunos do Queens' College
__label__pt Leptobrachella serasanae é uma espécie de anfíbio da família Megophryidae. Pode ser encontrada nos seguintes países: Indonésia e Malásia. Os seus habitats naturais são: florestas subtropicais ou tropicais húmidas de baixa altitude e rios. Está ameaçada por perda de habitat. Referências Leptobrachella Anfíbios descritos em 1984
__label__pt O Journal of Pragmatics é um periódico mensal revisado por pares, cobrindo o subcampo linguístico da pragmática. Foi publicado e foi criado em 1977 por Jacob L. Mey (na época Universidade Odense) e Hartmut Haberland (Universidade de Roskilde). Os editores-chefe são Michael Haugh (Universidade de Queensland) e Marina Terkourafi (Universidade de Leiden). Os editores-chefes anteriores foram Jonathan Culpeper (Universidade de Lancaster; 2009-2014) e Neal R. Norrick (Universidade do Sarre; 2010-2016). De acordo com o Journal Citation Reports, a revista tem um fator de impacto para 2017 de 1,039. Ligações externas Publicações fundadas em 1977 Revistas científicas em inglês Revistas científicas da Elsevier Revistas científicas de linguística
__label__pt Vicco é uma cidade localizada no estado americano de Kentucky, no Condado de Perry. Demografia Segundo o censo americano de 2000, a sua população era de 318 habitantes. Em 2006, foi estimada uma população de 320, um aumento de 2 (0.6%). Geografia De acordo com o United States Census Bureau tem uma área de 2,0 km², dos quais 2,0 km² cobertos por terra e 0,0 km² cobertos por água. Vicco localiza-se a aproximadamente 336 m acima do nível do mar. Localidades na vizinhança O diagrama seguinte representa as localidades num raio de 24 km ao redor de Vicco. Ligações externas Cidades de Kentucky
__label__pt Gesico é uma comuna italiana da região da Sardenha, na província da Sardenha do Sul, com cerca de 988 habitantes. Estende-se por uma área de 25 km², tendo uma densidade populacional de 40 hab/km². Faz fronteira com Escolca (NU), Guamaggiore, Guasila, Mandas, Selegas, Suelli, Villanovafranca. Demografia Comunas da Sardenha do Sul
__label__pt NGC 3454 é uma galáxia espiral barrada (SBc) localizada na direcção da constelação de Leo. Possui uma declinação de +17° 20' 37" e uma ascensão recta de 10 horas, 54 minutos e 29,4 segundos. A galáxia NGC 3454 foi descoberta em 17 de Março de 1831 por John Herschel. Ver também Astronomia extragaláctica Lista de galáxias Lista de objectos NGC New General Catalogue Ligações externas NGC 3454 Constelação de Leo Galáxias espirais barradas
__label__pt Tron — filme de 1982 da Walt Disney Pictures Tron: o Legado — sequela do filme de 1982 estreada em dezembro de 2010 Tron: Evolution — jogo eletrônico de ação e aventura, paralelo ao filme Tron: o Legado TRON Project — kernel de sistema operacional de tempo-real Boris Floricic — phracker alemão Desambiguações de cinema
__label__pt O Badminton nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 2004 - Simples feminino foi a quarta edição da competição nos Jogos Olímpicos. Teve como vencedora Zhang Ning, da China. Chaveamento Ver também Badminton nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 2004 Eventos do badmínton nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 2004
__label__pt 1981 - 1982 é um EP da banda britânica de rock New Order, lançado em Novembro de 1982. Ele reúne os primeiros singles lançados pela banda em 1981 e 1982. Faixas Ligações externas Álbuns de New Order EP de 1982
__label__pt Ácido 4-hidroxinaftaleno-1-sulfônico, ácido 1-naftol-4-sulfônico ou ácido de Neville-Winther é o composto orgânico de fórmula molecular C10H8O4S, SMILES C1=CC=C2C(=C1)C(=CC=C2S(=O)(=O)O)O, massa molecular 224,23. Apresenta ponto de fusão de 170 ℃. É classificado com o número CAS 84-87-7, CBNumber CB5743566 e MOL File 84-87-7.mol. Produção É preparado pelo tratamento de ácido 1,4-diazonaftalenessulfônico com ácido sulfúrico, pela sulfonação de alfa-naftilcarbonato pela reação de ácido clorossulfônico com 1-naftol e pelo tratamento do naftionato de sódio pelo dióxido de enxofre. Decomoõe-se aos 170 °C. KOH 3x10-9. É muito solúvel em água. Seus sais dissolvidos produzem uma coloração azul com cloreto férrico. É usado na preparação de corantes azo Ver também Ácido alfa-Schäffer, um isômero de posição. Fenóis Ácidos sulfônicos
__label__pt A acilação de Kostanecki é um método utilizado em síntese orgânica para formar cromonas ou cumarinas pela acilação de o-hidroxiarilcetonas com anidridos de ácido alifáticos seguida de ciclização. Se o anidrido benzoico (ou o cloreto de benzoíla) for usado, um tipo particular de cromona chamado flavona é obtido. Mecanismo O mecanismo consiste em três etapas: o-acilação do fenol com formação de um intermediário tetraédrico; Condensação aldólica intramolecular para ciclizar e formar uma hidroxidi-hidrocromona; Eliminação do grupo hidroxila para formar a cromona (ou cumarina); Exemplos de produtos Alvocidib (flavopiridol) Dimefline Flavoxato Ver também Reação de Allan-Robinson Reações orgânicas
__label__pt O mainatari (ou maihanatari) é uma língua extinta da família linguística arawak falada no Castaña-Paraná, um afluente do rio Siapa na Venezuela. 52 palavras foram coletadas por Johann Natterer em 1831. Vocabulário Vocabulário mainatari segundo Natterer (1831: 331-333) (em Ramirez 2019/2020): Ver também Línguas aruaques Ligações externas Vocabulário manitenéri - Schuller (1911) Mainatari Línguas da Venezuela
__label__pt Daknopholis Clayton é um género botânico pertencente à família Poaceae, subfamília Chloridoideae, tribo Cynodonteae. O gênero apresenta uma única espécie. Ocorrem na África. Espécie Daknopholis boivinii (A. Camus) Clayton Referências Ligações externas Poaceae Géneros de plantas
__label__pt Açoreira ou Assoreira era, em 1747, uma pequena aldeia portuguesa do concelho, termo e freguesia de São João Baptista de Sinfaens, Distrito do Douro, Bispado e Comarca da cidade de Lamego, Província da Beira. Aldeias do Distrito de Viseu Cinfães
__label__pt Rubén Marcos (6 de dezembro de 1942 - 14 de agosto de 2006) é um ex-futebolista chileno. Ele competiu na Copa do Mundo FIFA de 1966, sediada na Inglaterra. Futebolistas do Chile Futebolistas do Club Universidad de Chile Futebolistas do Club Deportivo Palestino Jogadores da Copa do Mundo FIFA de 1966
__label__pt Eusuchia é um clado de Crocodylomorpha que surgiu no período Cretáceo Inferior. Todos os crocodilianos recentes pertencem a este clado. Filogenia Cladograma segundo Pol, Turner e Norell, 2009: Cladograma segundo Puértolas, Canudo e Cruzado-Caballero, 2011: Crocodylomorpha
__label__pt Mike Grocott é professor de anestesia e medicina intensiva na Universidade de Southampton e director designado do Southampton NIHR Biomedical Research Center. Ele é um investigador sénior do NIHR (2018-22) e líder do grupo de especialidades nacionais de Anesthesia Peri Operating Medicine and Pain no NIHR Clinical Research Network (2015-2022). Ele é consultor em medicina intensiva no University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust. Grocott é um membro eleito do conselho e vice-presidente do Royal College of Anesthetists. Professores da Universidade de Southampton Membros do Colégio Real de Medicina Pessoas vivas
__label__pt Ferenc Stámusz (21 de agosto de 1934 - 27 de agosto de 2022) foi um ex-ciclista húngaro que competiu no ciclismo nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 1960 e 1964, representando a Hungria. Ciclistas olímpicos da Hungria Ciclistas nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 1960 Ciclistas nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 1964 Naturais de Budapeste
__label__pt Dhatau é uma vila no distrito de Raigarh, no estado indiano de Maharashtra. Demografia Segundo o censo de 2001, Dhatau tinha uma população de 5035 habitantes. Os indivíduos do sexo masculino constituem 56% da população e os do sexo feminino 44%. Dhatau tem uma taxa de literacia de 72%, superior à média nacional de 59.5%: a literacia no sexo masculino é de 78% e no sexo feminino é de 65%. Em Dhatau, 14% da população está abaixo dos 6 anos de idade. Localidades de Maharashtra
__label__pt Sveta Trojica v Slovenskih goricah () é um município da Eslovênia. A sede do município fica na localidade de mesmo nome. Ligações externas Site de Sveta Trojica v Slovenskih goricah Municípios da Podravska
__label__pt O Campeonato do Mundo B de Hóquei Patins de 1990 Foi a 4ª edição do Campeonato do Mundo B de Hóquei em Patins, que se realiza a cada dois anos. É uma competição organizada pela FIRS (Federação Internacional de Desportos sobre patins) que apura os 3 primeiros classificados para o Campeonato do Mundo de Hóquei em Patins Masculino de 1991 e também para os Jogos Olímpicos de 1992. A competição decorreu em Cidade Macau, Macau entre os dias 7 de Outubro e 14 de Outubro. Inscritos Estão representados os cinco continentes na 4ª edição do Campeonato do Mundo B de Hóquei em Patins, nesta edição registou-se o maior número de países participantes, 22 no total. Fase de Grupos Grupo A | |} Grupo B | |} Grupo C | |} Fase Final Apuramento Campeão 5º/8º 9º/16º 13º/16º 17º/22º | |} Classificação final Campeonato do Mundo B de Hóquei em Patins
__label__pt é um município de na província , nas Filipinas. De acordo com o censo de possui uma população de pessoas e domicílios. Demografia Ligações externas PhilAtlas.com Código Geográfico Padrão Filipino Sistema de gestão de desempenho de governança local Municípios de Misamis Oriental
__label__pt Elon College é uma cidade localizada no estado norte-americano de Carolina do Norte, no Condado de Alamance. Demografia Segundo o censo norte-americano de 2000, a sua população era de 6738 habitantes. Geografia De acordo com o United States Census Bureau tem uma área de 8,8 km², dos quais 8,8 km² cobertos por terra e 0,0 km² cobertos por água. Localidades na vizinhança O diagrama seguinte representa as localidades num raio de 8 km ao redor de Elon College. Ligações externas Cidades da Carolina do Norte Condado de Alamance
__label__pt "60 Segundos" é uma canção do cantor sertanejo brasileiro Gusttavo Lima, lançado em Fevereiro de 2012 e extraído de seu segundo álbum ao vivo Gusttavo Lima e Você, sendo o terceiro single. Composição A música escrita por Pedro Eduardo, conta com um enredo romântico e com uma forte interpretação. Apresentações ao vivo A canção foi apresentada exclusivamente no programa Agora é Tarde, no dia 8 de fevereiro de 2012. O cantor também cantou a canção no programa Tudo é Possível no dia 26 de fevereiro de 2012, e também cantou os sucessos "Inventor dos Amores", "Rosas, Versos e Vinhos", "Cor de Ouro" e "Balada". Um ano depois, a música foi cantada no Programa do Ratinho no dia 4 de março, juntamente com as canções "Balada" e "Inventor dos Amores". Desempenho nas paradas Singles de 2012 Canções gravadas por Gusttavo Lima Baladas de música pop
__label__pt Pedro Marcos Ribeiro da Costa (21 de outubro de 1921 - 2 de setembro de 2010) foi um bispo angolano da diocese de Saurimo quando da sua nomeação, em 3 de fevereiro de 1977, até sua aposentadoria em 15 de janeiro de 1997. Ele também continuou a ser o bispo emérito da diocese de Saurimo, até sua morte em 2010. Religiosos de Angola
__label__pt Liquid Peace of Me é o terceiro álbum do guitarrista virtuoso brasileiro Sérgio "Serj" Buss. O álbum conta com participações especiais de grandes músicos, como: Aquiles Priester, Brett Garsed, Blues Saraceno, Claudinho Infante, Diego Porres, Edu Ardanuy, Fabio Zaganin, Lauro de Castro, Luiz Sacoman, Marcelo Barbosa, Otávio de Moraes, Serginho Carvalho, Steve Blucher, TJ Helmerich, entre outros. O CD é todo autoral e instrumental. Faixas 01. Brain cracked (3:29) 02. A Rainha dos condenados (4:23) 03. O outro lado (3:06) 04. Thinking heads (3:57) 05. No chão (4:37) 06. O Anjo do silêncio (4:28) 07. Would you? (3:10) 08. Lines and curves (5:22) 09. Time to heal (7:53) 10. Herói de mentira (5:12) 11. Hostile (4:05) 12. Premonition (5:53) 13. Towards a precipice (7:08) 14. Liquid piece of me (2:15) 15. A second prayer (3:46) 16. Zero mind (1:56) 17. We die (2:49) Álbuns de 2007 Álbuns de rock instrumental Álbuns de Sérgio Buss
__label__pt A Universidade Estadual Ball (em inglês Ball State University) é uma instituição de ensino superior pública localizada em Muncie, no estado americano de Indiana. Foi fundada em 1917, pelos Irmãos Ball, tendo passado para o controle estadual no ano seguinte. Ligações externas Página oficial da Universidade Estadual Ball Universidades de Indiana
__label__pt O México competiu nos Jogos Pan-Americanos de 1971 em Cáli, Colômbia, de 25 de julho a 8 de agosto de 1971. Conquistou 41 medalhas no total. Ver também México nos Jogos Pan-Americanos Países nos Jogos Pan-Americanos de 1971 1971 Desporto no México em 1971
__label__pt Săvineşti é uma comuna romena localizada no distrito de Neamţ, na região de Moldávia. A comuna possui uma área de 15.69 km² e sua população era de 6608 habitantes segundo o censo de 2007. Comunas de Neamț (distrito)
__label__pt Cladosporium é um género de fungo que se apresenta como manchas escuras, de cor marrom ou preta, tem aspecto aveludado e pode formar ramificações semelhantes a "arvorezinhas". Atacam vegetais, causando sérios danos aos mesmos e consequentemente grandes prejuízos, principalmente para a agricultura. Davidiellaceae Patógenos e doenças de plantas
__label__pt A Catedral Metropolitana de Natal (também conhecida como Catedral Nova ou Catedral Nova Cidade), é uma catedral dedicada a Nossa Senhora da Apresentação de Natal. Foi inaugurada em 21 de novembro de 1988, e localiza-se no bairro da Cidade Alta, em Natal, capital do estado brasileiro do Rio Grande do Norte. Ela possui um estilo de construção com linhas ascendentes na forma trapezoidal bastante peculiar. No subsolo do prédio, encontra-se o Centro Pastoral Pio X, onde funciona o Gabinete do Arcebispo, a Cúria Metropolitana, a Paróquia da Catedral, além da coordenação de diversas pastorais. A ocasião de sua terceira visita ao Brasil, a catedral recebeu o Papa João Paulo II em 13 de outubro de 1991. Ligações externas Natal Igrejas de Natal (Rio Grande do Norte) Arquidiocese de Natal
__label__pt Pekka Himanen () é um filósofo finlandês conhecido pela sua obra The Hacker Ethic and the Spirit of the Information Age que discute a ética hacker. Biografia Nasceu na Finlândia. Torna-se doutor em filosofia pela Universidade de Helsínquia aos 20 anos. Antes de completar 30 anos, já trabalhava na Universidade de Berkeley com Manuel Castells, de origem catalã. Ver também Lei de Linus Filósofos da Finlândia
__label__pt Ibaraki (茨木市 -shi) é uma cidade japonesa localizada na província de Osaka. Em 2003 a cidade tinha uma população estimada em 262 516 habitantes e uma densidade populacional de 3 430,68 h/km². Tem uma área total de 76,52 km². Recebeu o estatuto de cidade a 1 de Janeiro de 1948. Referências Ligações externas Site oficial em japonês Cidades de Osaka (prefeitura)
__label__pt O calibre 23 mm é um tamanho muito específico de munição utilizado em canhões automáticos. Esse calibre foi utilizado de forma bastante restrita, exemplos de suas variantes são: 23x115mm calibre utilizado em muitos aviões soviéticos e russos 23x122mm 23x139mmSR 23x152mmB calibre utilizado no Ilyushin Il-2 e armas antiaéreas soviéticas Ver também Calibres por proximidade de diâmetro em mm (polegadas): Família 2mm de calibres (.079+) Família 3mm de calibres (.118+) Família 4mm de calibres (.157+) Família 5mm de calibres (.197+) Família 6mm de calibres (.236+) Família 7mm de calibres (.276+) Família 8mm de calibres (.315+) Família 9mm de calibres (.354+) Família 10mm de calibres (.394+) Família 11mm de calibres (.433+) Família 12mm de calibres (.472+) Família 13mm de calibres (.511+) Família 20mm de calibres (.787+) Família 23mm de calibres (.905+) Família 25mm de calibres (.984+) Família 30mm de calibres (1.181+) Família 37mm de calibres (1.456+) Família 40mm de calibres (1.574+) Calibre Gáugio Cartuchos de pistola e fuzil
__label__pt Catie DeLoof (12 de fevereiro de 1997) é uma nadadora estadunidense, medalhista olímpica. Carreira Formada pela Universidade de Michigan, DeLoof conquistou a medalha de bronze nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 2020 em Tóquio na prova de revezamento 4×100 m livre feminino, ao lado de Erika Brown, Abbey Weitzeil, Natalie Hinds, Simone Manuel, Allison Schmitt e Olivia Smoliga, com a marca de 3:32.81. Nadadores olímpicos dos Estados Unidos Nadadores nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 2020 Medalhistas nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 2020 Medalhistas olímpicos da natação
__label__pt León Mejía (nascido em 1934) é um ex-ciclista colombiano. Representou seu país, Colômbia, no ciclismo nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 1956. Ciclistas olímpicos da Colômbia Ciclistas nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 1956
__label__pt Capnometria, conhecida pela abreviatura PetCO2, é a medida da concentração de dióxido de carbono (CO2) no fim da expiração O valor de referência é de 35 a 37mmhg. É um método não invasivo de medir a pressão parcial de CO2 arterial (PaCO2). Exames médicos
__label__pt Ribera Alta (em ) ou Erriberagoitia (em ) é um município da Espanha na província de Álava, comunidade autónoma do País Basco, de área 119,78 km² com população de 683 habitantes (2007) e densidade populacional de 4,86 hab/km². Demografia Municípios de Álava Municípios da Espanha por nome Localidades da Espanha Localidades da Comunidade Autónoma do País Basco Localidades de Álava Municípios por nome da Comunidade Autónoma do País Basco
__label__pt É uma fibra têxtil sintética de poliacrilonitrila ou cianeto de vinila, usada na fabricação de peças de agasalho de lã sintética. Também em cobertores, jaquetas e mantas, o orlon por ser uma fibra textil acrílica é muito usado nessas fabricações.Também é usado como recheio para ursos de pelúcia.
__label__pt Vienne-la-Ville é uma comuna francesa na região administrativa do Grande Leste, no departamento de Marne. Estende-se por uma área de 7.48 km², e possui 173 habitantes, segundo o censo de 2018, com uma densidade de 23 hab/km². Comunas de Marne (departamento)
__label__pt Saint-Sauveur () é uma comuna francesa na região administrativa da Occitânia, no departamento do Alto Garona. Estende-se por uma área de 7.04 km², com 1.768 habitantes, segundo o censo de 2018, com uma densidade de 250 hab/km². Comunas do Alto Garona
__label__pt Focus foi uma edição licenciada da revista semanal alemã homónima. Tal como a congénere alemã, pretendia tratar temas da actualidade, do mundo, do dinheiro e histórias de vidas. A edição portuguesa foi lançada em 25 de outubro de 1999 com 60 000 exemplares, a partir da redacção situada em Ranholas - Sintra. Em 2010 mantinha uma edição de cerca de 30 000 exemplares. A edição portuguesa da revista Focus foi descontinuada em janeiro de 2012. Revistas semanais de informação de Portugal Revistas em português Revistas extintas de Portugal Fundações em Portugal em 1999 Extinções em Portugal em 2012 Grupo Impala Revistas de papel
__label__pt Um banco de dados de séries temporais do inglês Time series database (TSDB) é um sistema de software que é otimizado para armazenar e servir em séries temporais através de pares de tempo(s) e valor(es) associados. Em alguns campos, as séries temporais podem ser chamadas de perfis, curvas, traços ou ainda, tendências. Vários bancos de dados iniciais de séries temporais estão associados a aplicações industriais que poderiam armazenar de forma eficiente valores medidos a partir de equipamentos sensoriais (também conhecidos como historiadores de dados), mas agora são usados para suportar uma gama muito maior de aplicações. Em muitos casos, os repositórios de dados de séries temporais utilizarão algoritmos de compressão para gerenciar os dados de maneira eficiente. Embora seja possível armazenar dados de séries temporais em muitos tipos de bancos de dados diferentes, o design desses sistemas com o tempo como um índice chave é distintamente diferente dos bancos de dados relacionais que reduzem relacionamentos discretos por meio de modelos referenciais. Software de séries temporais
__label__pt Castelo de Huntingtower, também conhecido como Castelo de Ruthven, localiza-se a Oeste da cidade de Perth, no centro da Escócia. História O castelo foi construído no século XV pelo clã Ruthven e por isso ficou conhecido, por séculos, como a casa ou lugar de Ruthven. No Verão de 1582, foi ocupado pelo 4º Lorde Ruthven, 1º conde de Gowrie, e sua família. Este nobre envolveu-se em uma trama para sequestrar o jovem Jaime VI da Escócia. Características O castelo compreende duas torres apalaçadas. O hall da torre Oriental tem um teto ricamente pintado. Ver também Historic Scotland Huntingtower
__label__pt NGC 67 é uma galáxia elíptica (E) localizada na direcção da constelação de Andromeda. Possui uma declinação de +30° 03' 48" e uma ascensão recta de 0 horas, 18 minutos e 14,9 segundos. A galáxia NGC 67 foi descoberta em 7 de Outubro de 1855 por William Parsons. Ver também Astronomia extragaláctica Lista de galáxias Lista de objectos NGC New General Catalogue Referências 0067 Galáxias elípticas Constelação de Andromeda Objetos astronômicos descobertos em 1855 de:PGC 1185
__label__pt , também escrito como 2002 PE153, é um objeto transnetuniano que está localizado no Cinturão de Kuiper, uma região do Sistema Solar. Este corpo celeste é classificado como um cubewano. Ele possui uma magnitude absoluta de 6,5 e tem um diâmetro estimado com cerca de 221 km. Descoberta foi descoberto no dia 15 de agosto de 2002 pelos astrônomos M. J. Holman, J. J. Kavelaars, T. Grav e W. Fraser. Órbita A órbita de tem uma excentricidade de 0,064 e possui um semieixo maior de 44,039 UA. O seu periélio leva o mesmo a uma distância de 41,234 UA em relação ao Sol e seu afélio a 46,843 UA. Cubewanos Objetos do cinturão de Kuiper Objetos transnetunianos Objetos astronômicos descobertos em 2002
__label__pt Grammomys dolichurus é uma espécie de roedor da família Muridae. Pode ser encontrada nos seguintes países: Angola, Burundi, República Democrática do Congo, Quénia, Malawi, Moçambique, Ruanda, África do Sul, Sudão, Essuatíni, Tanzânia, Zâmbia e Zimbabwe. Os seus habitats naturais são: florestas secas tropicais ou subtropicais , florestas subtropicais ou tropicais húmidas de baixa altitude, matagal árido tropical ou subtropical, matagal húmido tropical ou subtropical, matagal tropical ou subtropical de alta altitude, campos de gramíneas subtropicais ou tropicais secos de baixa altitude, terras aráveis, pastagens e áreas urbanas. Referências Grammomys dolichurus Grammomys dolichurus Mamíferos descritos em 1832
__label__pt Visconde de Nápoles e Lemos é um título nobiliárquico criado por D. Carlos I de Portugal, por Decreto de 19 de Junho de 1905, em favor de Tomás Metelo de Nápoles e Lemos. Titulares Tomás Metelo de Nápoles e Lemos, 1.° Visconde de Nápoles e Lemos. +Nápoles E Lemos +Nápoles E Lemos
__label__pt Deval Laurdine Patrick (Chicago, 31 de julho de 1956) é um político estadunidense e foi governador do Estado de Massachusetts de 2007 a 2015. Em 7 de novembro de 2006, Patrick se converteu na primeira pessoa da raça negra elegida para o cargo de governador de Massachusetts e o segundo governador negro em toda a história do país. Foi eleito com 56% dos votos, com 20 pontos de vantagem sobre sua adversária, Kerry Healy. Tomou posse de seu cargo em janeiro de 2007. Está casado com Diane Patrick e tem duas filhas, Sarah e Katherine. É filiado ao Partido Democrata. Ligações externas Página oficial Naturais de Chicago Presbiterianos dos Estados Unidos Alunos da Universidade Harvard Advogados dos Estados Unidos Democratas de Massachusetts Governadores do Massachusetts Políticos afro-americanos !Mais Teoria da História na Wiki (Wikiconcurso de edição) !Mais Teoria da História na Wiki (Negres)
__label__pt O Observatório Meteorológico do Infante D. Luís, ou Instituto do Infante D. Luís (1853 — 1946), foi um observatório meteorológico construído na cerca da Escola Politécnica de Lisboa, onde é actualmente o Jardim Botânico da Universidade de Lisboa, para servir como local de observação meteorológica e como centro de ensino e de investigação em meteorologia. O investimento foi feito na sequência da Conferência de Bruxelas e dos compromissos ali assumidos por Portugal. O observatório meteorológico veio a ser também denominado Instituto do Infante D. Luís. Em 1946, com a criação do Serviço Meteorológico Nacional assumiu o estatuto de estabelecimento anexo da Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa. Universidade de Lisboa Infante D. Luís Fundações em Portugal em 1853 Extinções em Portugal em 1946
__label__pt O Navigator é um SUV grande de luxo da Lincoln desde 1998, compartilha a mesma plataforma do Ford Expedition. Galeria Ver também Lincoln Corsair Lincoln Nautilus Lincoln Aviator Ligações externas Página oficial Navigator Utilitários esportivos Automóveis do segmento F
__label__pt Ciprian Manolescu é um matemático romeno conhecido por suas contribuições para a topologia e a geometria. É detentor de diversos prêmios, entre os quais o Prêmio Morgan e o Prêmio EMS. Ver também Hauptvermutung Matemáticos da Roménia Participantes da Olimpíada Internacional de Matemática
__label__pt Vida ou Morte é o primeiro single do álbum Depois de um Longo Inverno da banda paulista CPM 22. A música fez um grande sucesso nas rádios de todo o brasil, alcançando a posição #13 do Hot 100 Brasil em Dezembro de 2010. Nova Sonoridade O single marcou a mudança no estilo da banda, inserindo o ska punk no álbum, o que gerou grande impacto por parte dos fãs. No que diz respeito à letra da canção a banda abandonou as letras melosas e adotou uma letra mais alegre. Singles de 2010 Canções gravadas por CPM 22 Canções de 2010 Canções de rock brasileiro
__label__pt Mirko Stojanović (Zagreb, 11 de junho de 1939) é um ex-futebolista iugoslavo que atuava como goleiro. Carreira Mirko Stojanović fez parte do elenco da Seleção Iugoslava na Copa do Mundo de 1962. Títulos Dinamo Zagreb Copa da Iugoslávia: 1959–60 Estrela Vermelha Primeira Divisão Iugoslava: 1963–64 Copa da Iugoslávia: 1963–64 Dallas Tornado North American Soccer League: 1971 Ligações externas Perfil em Fifa.com Futebolistas da Iugoslávia Jogadores da Copa do Mundo FIFA de 1962 Jogadores da Seleção Iugoslava de Futebol Naturais de Zagreb
__label__pt Espaço Pasárgada é um centro cultural, instalado na casa onde residiu Antonio José da Costa Ribeiro, avô materno do poeta Manuel Bandeira. A casa é citada no poema Evocação do Recife como "a casa de meu avô". Nela o poeta residiu entre os seis e dez anos de idade, quando, segundo o próprio poeta, se formou sua mitologia, que para ele tinha mais consistência que a mitologia grega. Foi inaugurada em 19 de abril de 1986, em comemoração ao centenário do poeta. O prédio, tombado pelo governo de Pernambuco, através da Fundarpe, atualmente se configura como um centro de cultura e literatura de Pernambuco. Ligação externa Espaço Pasárgada Institutos culturais Patrimônio histórico de Pernambuco Museus do Recife Manuel Bandeira
__label__pt Ellertshaar () é uma cidade dos Países Baixos, na província de Drente. Ellertshaar pertence ao município de Borger-Odoorn, e está situada a 17 km sudeste de Assen. A área de Ellertshaar, que também inclui as partes periféricas da cidade, bem como a zona rural circundante, tem uma população estimada em 30 habitantes. Cidades de Drente
__label__pt Melodia Fatal é uma telenovela brasileira produzida pela extinta TV Excelsior e exibida de 27 de outubro de 1964 a 1 de janeiro de 1965 no horário das 22 horas, totalizando 49 capítulos. Foi escrita por Nara Navarro e dirigida por Walter Avancini. Trama Uma história de amor com todos os ingredientes costumeiros e algum suspense. Elenco Telenovelas da TV Excelsior Programas de televisão do Brasil que estrearam em 1964 Programas de televisão do Brasil encerrados em 1964 Telenovelas da década de 1960 Telenovelas em português
__label__pt Jack Henry López (Río Piedras, 16 de dezembro de 1992) é um jogador de beisebol estadunidense, que joga na posição de defensor interno (infielder). Carreira Fujita compôs o elenco da Seleção dos Estados Unidos de Beisebol nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 2020 em Tóquio, onde conquistou a medalha de prata após confronto contra a equipe japonesa na final da competição. Beisebolistas olímpicos dos Estados Unidos Beisebolistas nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 2020 Medalhistas nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 2020 Medalhistas olímpicos do beisebol
__label__pt Psittacastis é um gênero de traça pertencente à família Agonoxenidae. Referências Bibliografia Nielsen E.S., Edwards E.D. & Rangsi T.V. (eds.) (1996), Checklist of the Lepidoptera of Australia; Monographs on Australian Lepidoptera Volume 4; CSIRO Publishing, Melbourne, 1996 Kristensen, N.P. (ed.), 1999. Handbook of Zoology: Bd. 4. Arthropoda: Insecta. Teilbd. 35, Lepidoptera, moths and butterflies. Vol. 1. Evolution, systematics, and biogeography. W.de Gruyter, Berlin. Agonoxenidae
__label__pt O taekwondo nos Jogos da Lusofonia de 2014 foi disputado na Sala Multiuso Pelem em Mapuçá. Todos os 8 eventos foram disputados no dia 26 de janeiro. Calendário Participantes , e não enviaram atletas para este esporte. Medalhistas Masculino Feminino 2014 Taekwondo
__label__pt Villedieu-la-Blouère é uma ex-comuna francesa na região administrativa da Pays de la Loire, no departamento de Maine-et-Loire. Estendeu-se por uma área de 14,35 km². Em 15 de dezembro de 2015 foi fundida com as comunas de Andrezé, Beaupréau, La Chapelle-du-Genêt, Gesté, Jallais, La Jubaudière, Le Pin-en-Mauges, La Poitevinière e Saint-Philbert-en-Mauges para a criação da nova comuna de Beaupréau-en-Mauges. Antigas comunas de Maine-et-Loire
__label__pt Eupseudosoma é um gênero de traça pertencente à família Arctiidae. Referências Bibliografia Bates DL, Fenton MB (1990) Aposematism or startle? Predators learn their responses to the defenses of prey. Can J Zool 68:49–52 Dunning DC, Krüger M (1995) Aposematic sounds in African moths. Biotropica 27:227–231 Dunning DC, Acharya L, Merriman CB, Ferro LD (1992) Interactions between bats and arctiid moths. Can J Zool 70:2218–2223 Fullard JH, Fenton MB, Simmons JA (1979) Jamming bat echolocation: the clicks of arctiid moths. Can J Zool 57:647–649 William Conner (ed.). (2009). Tiger moths and woolly bears : behavior, ecology, and evolution of the Arctiidae. Oxford University Press: New York. ISBN 9780195327373 Ligações externas Natural History Museum - Lepidoptera - catálogo de nomes genéricos Arctiidae
__label__pt Passo do Stelvio - passo de montanha entre a Itália e a Suíça. Parque Nacional do Stelvio - parque nacional no extremo norte da Itália. Stelvio (em alemão Stilfs) - comuna italiana do Tirol do Sul. Prato allo Stelvio (em alemão Prad am Stilfserjoch) é uma comuna italiana do Tirol do Sul. Pessoas Stélvio Rosa da Cruz - futebolista português. Stelvio Cipriani - compositor italiano. Stelvio Massi - cineasta italiano. Stelvio Mestrovich - musicólogo italiano.
__label__pt Mato Grande pode se referir a: Mato Grande, vila na Ilha Brava em Cabo Verde Mato Grande, uma região do estado do Rio Grande do Norte, Brasil Mato Grande, distrito do município de Giruá, Rio Grande do Sul, Brasil Mato Grande, distrito do município de São Miguel das Missões, Rio Grande do Sul, Brasil Mato Grande, bairro do município de Canoas, Rio Grande do Sul, Brasil Desambiguação
__label__pt "Strawberry Lipstick" é uma canção do cantor britânico Yungblud, gravada para seu segundo álbum de estúdio Weird! (2020). Foi escrita por Josh McClorey, Yungblud e Chris Greatti, sendo produzida pelos últimos dois com Zakk Cervini. Foi lançada pela Locomotion Recordings e Interscope Records como segundo single do álbum em 16 de julho de 2020. Antecedentes Em 7 de julho de 2020, Dom anunciou o single com a capa e a data de lançamento. Dom revelou mais tarde em um tweet que o cachorro ao seu lado na capa era chamado de "Cannoli". Videoclipe O videoclipe foi dirigido por Christian Breslauer e lançado em 16 de julho de 2020. Singles de 2020 Canções gravadas por Yungblud Canções compostas por Yungblud Canções de 2020 Singles lançados pela Interscope Records
__label__pt È ou è pode ser A letra E com um acento grave. No inglês, a letra "è" pode ser usada em textos poéticos para determinar que a última sílaba de um verbo no pretérito seja pronunciada separadamente. Por exemplo, o "è" em "blessèd" (abençoado) indica que a palavra deve ser pronunciada ""bles"-"sed"" ao invés de "blest". "È" tambem pode ser usado em palavras emprestadas como o italiano "caffè". No italiano, "è" significa "ser" ou "é", por exemplo "il cane è piccolo", significando "o cachorro é pequeno". "È" deriva do latim "est" e é acentuado para se distinguir de "e", que significa "e" no português. No latim macedônico, "è" é equivalente a letra "Ye" com acento grave. Gramática
__label__pt Mohamed Latif (23 de outubro de 1909 - 17 de março de 1990) foi um futebolista e treinador egípcio que jogava como atacante. Carreira Copa de 1934 Durante sua carreira, ele jogou no Al-Zamalek. Ele foi convocado para a histórica Seleção Egípcia de Futebol na Copa do Mundo FIFA de 1934.. Rangers Pós-copa os olheiros do Rangers e o treinador James McCrae o levaram para a Escócia, porém, acabou atuando pouco na Liga Escocesa, e ainda disputou os Jogos Olímpicos de 1936, pela seleção natal. Ligações Externas Perfil em Fifa.com Futebolistas do Egito Futebolistas olímpicos do Egito Futebolistas nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 1936 Jogadores da Copa do Mundo FIFA de 1934 Jogadores da Seleção Egípcia de Futebol
__label__pt Avicularia laeta é uma espécie de aranha pertencente à família Theraphosidae (tarântulas). Outros Lista das espécies de Theraphosidae (Lista completa das Tarântulas.) Terafosídeos Aracnídeos Aranhas descritas em 1842
__label__pt KVM é uma abreviação que pode se referir a: Siglas Kernel-based Virtual Machine, é um programa de computador que proporciona a emulação e virtualização de vários computadores num mesmo computador. Chaveador KVM ("Keyboard, Video, Mouse"), Um KVM é um adaptador que permite ligar dois ou mais computadores ao mesmo teclado, mouse e monitor. Você pode alternar entre eles pressionando uma combinação de teclas, como "Scroll Lock, Scroll Lock, seta pra cima", o que não altera apenas o controle do mouse e teclado, mas troca também a imagem mostrada no monitor. Código kvm - código ISO 639-3 da língua kedem Desambiguação
__label__pt Cantareira é uma antiga zona portuária da cidade do Porto, localizada na freguesia de Foz do Douro. Encontra-se aqui o "Estaleiro do Ouro" local de construção e reparação de embarcações de madeira, actualmente em fase de concurso público para requalificação. Local onde se encontra a única travessia de barco para Vila Nova de Gaia, mais precisamente para a Afurada. Património Farol de São Miguel-o-Anjo Lugares e bairros da Área Metropolitana do Porto Lordelo do Ouro Geografia do Porto
__label__pt Chipre participou dos Jogos Paralímpicos de Verão de 1988, que foram realizados na cidade de Seul, na Coreia do Sul, entre os dias 15 e 24 de outubro de 1988. A equipe não obteve nenhuma medalha nesta edição das Paralimpíadas. Chipre 1988
__label__pt A seguir uma lista dos presidentes do Zimbabwe, desde a proclamação da república em 1970. República da Rodésia (1970–1979) Partidos: República do Zimbabwe-Rodésia (1979–1980) Partidos: República do Zimbabwe (1980–presente) Partidos: Ver também Presidente do Zimbabwe Política do Zimbabwe Zimbabwe Presidentes
__label__pt Lambda Aquarii (Hydor, Ekkhysis, 73 Aquarii) é uma estrela na direção da constelação de Aquarius. Possui uma ascensão reta de 22h 52m 36.86s e uma declinação de −07° 34′ 46.8″. Sua magnitude aparente é igual a 3.73. Considerando sua distância de 391 anos-luz em relação à Terra, sua magnitude absoluta é igual a −1.67. Pertence à classe espectral M2IIIvar. É uma estrela variável irregular. Ver também Designação de Bayer Designação de Flamsteed Catálogo Henry Draper Catálogo Hipparcos Estrelas Objetos de Bayer Constelação de Aquarius
__label__pt Broussy-le-Grand é uma comuna francesa na região administrativa do Grande Leste, no departamento de Marne. Estende-se por uma área de 21.31 km², e possui 311 habitantes, segundo o censo de 2018, com uma densidade de 15 hab/km². Comunas de Marne (departamento)
__label__pt Uhorská Ves é um município da Eslováquia, situado no distrito de Liptovský Mikuláš, na região de Žilina. Tem de área e sua população em 2018 foi estimada em 500 habitantes. Municípios da Eslováquia Municípios de Liptovský Mikuláš (distrito)
__label__pt O Prêmio UOL TV e Famosos de 2016 foi a 2ª edição do Troféu UOL TV e Famosos que premiou os melhores do ano de 2015 e 2016. Na premiação de 2016, houve entregas separadas dos prêmios no voto do público e no voto dos colunistas. Vencedores e indicados Troféu UOL TV e Famosos
__label__pt Os Secretários da Mesa integram a Mesa da Assembleia da República num total de 4. São eleitos por sufrágio de lista completa e nominativa e por legislatura. Compete-lhes proceder à verificação das presenças, do quorum, e registar as votações; ordenar as matérias a submeter à votação; organizar a inscrição dos oradores; promover a publicação do Diário da Assembleia da República; assinar a correspondência expedida em nome da Assembleia da República; coadjuvar o Presidente na orientação dos trabalhos. Assembleia da República Portuguesa
__label__pt A prova dos 5000 metros masculino do Campeonato Mundial de Atletismo de 2015 foi disputada entre 26 e 29 de agosto no Estádio Nacional de Pequim, em Pequim. Recordes Antes desta competição, os recordes mundiais e do campeonato nesta prova eram os seguintes: Medalhas Cronograma Todos os horários são locais (UTC+8). Resultados Eliminatórias Qualificação: Os 5 de cada bateria (Q) e os 5 melhores tempos (q) avançam para a semifinal. Final A final ocorreu às 19:30. Ligações externas Site da Associação Internacional de Federações de Atletismo Campeonato Mundial de Atletismo de 2015
__label__pt Ziesendorf é um município da Alemanha, situado no distrito de Rostock, no estado de Mecklemburgo-Pomerânia Ocidental. Tem de área, e sua população em 2019 foi estimada em 1.436 habitantes. Municípios de Meclemburgo-Pomerânia Ocidental
__label__pt "How Do U Want It" é uma canção do rapper estadunidense Tupac Shakur, com a participação do cantor de R&B K-Ci & JoJo lançada como terceiro single do álbum All Eyez on Me. Em 1997 a canção foi nomeada ao Grammy Awards na categoria melhor performance de rap por dupla ou grupo. Lista de faixas e formatos Desempenho nas paradas e certificações Gráficos semanais Tabelas de fim de ano Certificações Singles de 1996 Tupac Shakur Canções sobre sexualidade
__label__pt Cidade operária — localidade onde as habitações e espaços comuns são inicialmente de propriedade da entidade patronal que emprega os habitantes Bairros no Brasil Vila Operária (Goiana) Vila Operária (Magé) Vila Operária (Nova Iguaçu) Vila Operária (Nova Lima) Vila Operária (Presidente João Goulart), subdivisão de bairro Desambiguações de topônimos
__label__pt As minisséries da TV Cultura estão relacionadas nesta lista, que apresenta: data de início, data do final e quantidade de capítulos das minisséries da TV Cultura. Minisséries em ordem de exibição Década de 1990 Década de 2000 Década de 2020 Ver também Lista de telenovelas da TV Cultura Lista de séries de televisão da TV Cultura
__label__pt Arma ARMA — modelos auto-regressivos de médias móveis (autoregressive-moving-average) ARMA: Armed Assault — jogo para computadores Geografia Arma (distrito) Huayacundo Arma (distrito) Quito-Arma (distrito) Desambiguações de topônimos
__label__pt As Termas romanas de Badenweiler são as ruínas das termas romanas em Badenweiler, Alemanha. Leitura Holger Sonnabend: Unter der Herrschaft der Caesaren (Sob o domínio dos Césares). 216 páginas. G. Braun Buchverlag 2012. ISBN 9783765084065. Páginas 171 - 172: Badenweiler. Termas romanas da classe luxo. Revista Conservação de Monumentos Baden-Württemberg, 3/2009, 10 de março 2009, páginas 134 - 139 d0 ano 2009 (páginas 7 - 13 do documento PDF): Descobertas 225 anos atrás e apresentadas debaixo de aço e vidro. As termas medicinais de Badenweiler. Termas romanas Termas da Alemanha
__label__pt Kłecko (polaco: Gmina Kłecko) é uma gminy (comuna) na Polónia, na voivodia de Grande Polónia e no condado de Gnieźnieński. A sede do condado é a cidade de Kłecko. De acordo com os censos de 2004, a comuna tem 7615 habitantes, com uma densidade 57,8 hab/km². Área Estende-se por uma área de 131,7 km², incluindo: área agricola: 86% área florestal: 5% Demografia Dados de 30 de Junho 2004: De acordo com dados de 2002, o rendimento médio per capita ascendia a 1390,9 zł. Subdivisões Bielawy, Biskupice, Bojanice, Brzozogaj, Charbowo, Czechy, Dębnica, Działyń, Dziećmiarki, Gorzuchowo,Kamieniec, Komorowo, Michalcza, Polska Wieś, Pomarzany, Sulin, Świniary, Ułanowo, Waliszewo, Wilkowyja, Zakrzewo. Comunas vizinhas Gniezno, Kiszkowo, Łubowo, Mieleszyn, Mieścisko, Skoki Ligações externas Kłecko
__label__pt Die rote Jacke é um filme de drama alemão em curta-metragem de 2002 dirigido e escrito por Florian Baxmeyer. Produzido no curso de pós-graduação da Universidade de Hamburgo, foi indicado ao Oscar de melhor curta-metragem em live action na edição de 2004. Elenco Nikola Jankovic Ulrich Noethen - Vater Catrin Striebeck Oliver Masucci Ligações externas Filmes em língua alemã Filmes da Alemanha de 2002 Filmes de drama da Alemanha Curtas-metragens da Alemanha
__label__pt O Condado de Bee é um dos 254 condados do estado norte-americano do Texas. A sede do condado é Beeville, e sua maior cidade é Beeville. O condado possui uma área de 2 280 km² (dos quais 0 km² estão cobertos por água), uma população de 32 359 habitantes, e uma densidade populacional de 14 hab/km² (segundo o censo nacional de 2000). O condado foi criado em 8 de dezembro de 1857. Bee
__label__pt O Aeroporto de Caldas Novas ( ICAO: SBCN | IATA: CLV ) está localizado no município de Caldas Novas, Goiás. Suas coordenadas são as seguintes: 17°43'31.00"S de latitude e 48°36'38.00"W de longitude. Possui uma pista de 2150 x 45m de asfalto, PN 35, opera visual e IFR noturno e diurno, NDB e GPS (GNSS). Inaugurado em 2002, é o segundo maior terminal de passageiros do estado de Goiás, com uma área coberta de 2980 metros quadrados, atrás apenas do aeroporto de Goiânia. Facilidades Terminal de passageiros com 3.000 m² de área coberta Estacionamento com capacidade de 230 vagas Estacionamento de aeronaves número de posições: 04 Estacionamento de aeronaves aviação geral: 10 Esteira para bagagens Lanchonete e restaurante Cafeteria Raio X para vistoria de bagagem de mão Pórtico detector de metais Sala de embarque Sala de desembarque Balcão de Check-in Locadoras de veículos Lojas com produtos regionais Ver também Lista de aeroportos do Brasil Caldas Novas
__label__pt O dia 18 de fevereiro de 2009 foi o dia da Cerimônia de Abertura e o primeiro dia de competições da Universíada de Inverno de 2009. Modalidades Destaques do dia Torneio feminino - fase preliminar 3 – 5 0 – 11 0 – 4 Torneio masculino - fase preliminar 0 – 10 0 – 10 Ligações externas !18 Fevereiro
__label__pt Aluízio Paraguassu Ferreira (Porto Alegre, – Tramandaí, ) foi um político brasileiro. Filho de Sady Alves Ferreira e Hilda Paraguassú Ferreira. Foi eleito vereador de Porto Alegre em 1968, pelo Movimento Democrático Brasileiro (MDB). Em 1971 assumiu uma cadeira na Assembleia Legislativa do Rio Grande do Sul, onde ficou até 1975. Foi deputado federal de 1975 a 1979 e de 1979 a 1983. Deputados federais do Brasil pelo Rio Grande do Sul Deputados estaduais do Rio Grande do Sul Naturais de Porto Alegre Vereadores de Porto Alegre Membros do Movimento Democrático Brasileiro (1966) Membros do Movimento Democrático Brasileiro (1980)
__label__pt Mark Edward Lenzi (Huntsville, 4 de Julho de 1968, Greenville, 09 de Abril de 2012) foi um saltador ornamental estadunidense, campeão olímpico em Barcelona-92. Conquistas 1991 - O primeiro atleta da história a alcançar uma pontuação superior a 100 pontos num salto. Jogos Pan-Americanos 1991 - Medalha de Ouro — Saltos Ornamentais: Trampolim de 1 metro Campeonato Mundial de Esportes Aquáticos 1991 - Medalha de Prata — Saltos Ornamentais: Trampolim de 1 metro Jogos Olímpicos 1992 - Medalha de Ouro — Saltos Ornamentais: Trampolim de 3 metros 1996 - Medalha de Bronze - Saltos Ornamentais: Trampolim de 3 metros Ver também Saltos ornamentais nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 1992 Saltos ornamentais nos Jogos Olímpicos de Verão de 1996 Ligações externas Perfil do atleta no sports-reference.com Mergulhadores dos Estados Unidos Saltadores olímpicos dos Estados Unidos Mortos em 2012
__label__pt Iungorodok () é uma estação terminal da Linha 1 do Metro de Samara, na Rússia. A estação «Iungorodok» está localizada após a estação «Kirovskaia». Próxima estação nesta linha a ser construída no futuro deve ser nomeada «Krylya Sovetov» (mesmo nome do clube de futebol bem conhecido da cidade). Ligações externas Iungorodok Linha 1 (metro de Samara)
__label__pt Stapar (Valjevo) (em cirílico: ) é uma vila da Sérvia localizada no município de Valjevo, pertencente ao distrito de Kolubara. A sua população era de 179 habitantes segundo o censo de 2011. Demografia Ligações externas Vilas de Kolubara
__label__pt A vida não é uma ciência exata, ela é uma arte.
__label__pt Estou morrendo de dor nas costas.
__label__pt Eu preciso tomar remédios.
__label__pt Minha esposa está tentando dormir.
__label__pt Por favor, não tirem fotos aqui.
__label__pt Eu gostaria de uma reserva no hotel.
__label__pt Obrigado, isso é tudo.
__label__pt Você pode me mostrar seu passaporte, por favor?
__label__pt Não é minha culpa!
__label__pt Não, repetiu o inglês.
__label__pt Eu irei pagar com cheque.
__label__pt Eu não entendo.
__label__pt Oh, ali está uma borboleta!
__label__pt Um garfo está faltando.
__label__pt Eu gosto muito do meu trabalho.
__label__pt O que está fazendo?
__label__pt Por favor, me traga o segurança do hotel.
__label__pt Eu gostaria de recuperar meus bens.
__label__pt Hoje está muito quente.
__label__pt John ficou em casa tal como lhe foi dito.
__label__pt Gosto não se discute.
__label__pt Eu gostaria de provar a saia azul com listras.
__label__pt O sinal '&' significa 'e'.
__label__pt Ela estava sempre praticando piano.
__label__pt Eu não sabia de onde isso veio.
__label__pt Vai ao médico pegar a receita!
__label__pt Quem são aqueles caras?
__label__pt Quanto custa?
__label__pt Esqueça disso. Não vale a pena.
__label__pt Eu gostaria de estudar em Paris.
__label__pt Preciso ir dormir.
__label__pt Tal pai, tal filho.
__label__pt Ele não faz meu tipo.
__label__pt Como foi que essa ideia insana lhe veio à mente?
__label__pt Eu uso um marca-passo.
__label__pt Desculpe-me. Retiro o que eu disse.
__label__pt Bob diz: "Quatro libras e cinquenta".
__label__pt Eu preciso ir para a cama.
__label__pt Por quanto tempo ficaste?
__label__pt Há um pequeno jardim na frente de minha casa.
__label__pt Feliz aniversário, Muiriel!
__label__pt Isso está me deixando louco.
__label__pt Quão longe daqui é o aeroporto?
__label__pt Casacos pretos são moda neste inverno.
__label__pt Quem compra este tipo de arte?
__label__pt Ele morreu em idade avançada.
__label__pt Ela ficou doente neste final de semana.
__label__pt Bom dia, como vai?
__label__pt A senha é "Muiriel".
__label__pt Eu geralmente tomo banho à noite.
__label__pt Não fale com ele enquanto ele dirige.
__label__pt Ah, quando eles se encontrarão novamente?
__label__pt Talvez você tenha razão, eu foi egoísta.
__label__pt Eu só posso esperar.
__label__pt Volte logo.
__label__pt O prisioneiro escapou na calada da noite.
__label__pt Na semana que vem irei trabalhar em Tóquio.
__label__pt A marca '&' significa 'e'.
__label__pt Feliz Natal!
__label__pt Eu sou dona de casa.
__label__pt Encare a vida com um sorriso!
__label__pt Vamos tentar alguma coisa!
__label__pt A conta, por favor.
__label__pt Assim eu mato dois coelhos com uma cajadada só.
__label__pt Eu devo lavar as roupas enquanto houver sol.
__label__pt Muriel completou 20 anos.
__label__pt Há um pouco de verdade no que ele está dizendo.
__label__pt As férias acabaram agora.
__label__pt Quando iremos comer? Eu estou com fome!
__label__pt Eu não tive a intenção de te passar tal impressão.
__label__pt Ao hotel Hilton, por favor.
__label__pt As sete questões que um engenheiro deve se perguntar: quem, o quê, quando, onde, por quê, como e quantos.
__label__pt Irei comprar uma nova câmera, desta vez uma digital.
__label__pt Eu não quero perder minhas ideias, mesmo que algumas delas sejam um pouco extremas.
__label__pt Este jornalista, cujo artigo te interessou tanto, é meu vizinho.
__label__pt O tédio é o sentimento de que tudo é uma grande perda de tempo; serenidade, de que nada é.
__label__pt Obrigado por me explicar finalmente por que as pessoas me tomam por um idiota.
__label__pt Ela se move como uma rainha e mostra que traz consigo o ritmo no sangue.
__label__pt Quando duas pessoas têm a mesma opinião, uma delas é supérflua.
__label__pt Eu não quero passar o resto da minha vida lamentando por isso.
__label__pt Na realidade, o custo de vida está subindo cada semana.
__label__pt Melhor ser odiado por aquilo que somos do que ser amado por aquilo que não somos.
__label__pt Você sabe a diferença entre um microscópio e um telescópio?
__label__pt Bicicletas são ferramentas para sustentabilidade urbana.
__label__pt Eu vim a Tóquio há três anos e desde então vivo aqui.
__label__pt Esta receita foi testada para vocês por uma das melhores equipes de gourmets da Romênia.
__label__pt É inevitável que eu vá para a França um dia, eu só não sei quando.
__label__pt Energia nuclear deve ser utilizada para fins pacíficos.
__label__pt Você realmente precisa perguntar pra saber a resposta?
__label__pt Se você precisar de um guarda-chuva, eu lhe empresto um.
__label__pt Esta canção é tão comovente que me traz lágrimas aos olhos.
__label__pt O lado material não define nossa vida, mas o lado espiritual.
__label__pt Ufa! Esta ladeira está difícil. Mas a volta será moleza.
__label__pt Quando você franze as sobrancelhas, isso pode significar "eu tenho vontade de fazer sexo com você", mas também "eu acho, que isso que você acabou de dizer é perfeitamente idiota".
__label__pt David tem uma inclinação apaixonada por Estética - as características que fazem uma pintura, uma escultura, uma composição musical ou um poema ser agradável aos olhos, ouvidos ou mente.
__label__es El municipio de Panola (en inglés: Panola Township) es un municipio ubicado en el condado de Woodford en el estado estadounidense de Illinois. En el año 2010 tenía una población de 353 habitantes y una densidad poblacional de 3,74 personas por km². Geografía El municipio de Panola se encuentra ubicado en las coordenadas . Según la Oficina del Censo de los Estados Unidos, el municipio tiene una superficie total de 94.47 km², de la cual 94,39 km² corresponden a tierra firme y (0,08 %) 0,08 km² es agua. Demografía Según el censo de 2010, había 353 personas residiendo en el municipio de Panola. La densidad de población era de 3,74 hab./km². De los 353 habitantes, el municipio de Panola estaba compuesto por el 95,75 % blancos, el 2,83 % eran afroamericanos, el 0,28 % eran asiáticos y el 1,13 % eran de una mezcla de razas. Del total de la población el 0,57 % eran hispanos o latinos de cualquier raza. Referencias Enlaces externos Municipios de Illinois Localidades del condado de Woodford (Illinois)
__label__es Andrea D'Angelo (Trieste, 1972) es un escritor italiano de literatura fantástica. Ha publicado cuatro novelas en la Editrice Nord: una trilogía y una novela de carácter psicológico, La Rocca dei Silenzi. En 2004 fue finalista del Premio Italia con La Fortezza, y en 2006 con La Rocca dei Silenzi. Bibliografía La trilogia delle Sette Gemme dell'Equilibrio: Le sette gemme (2002) ISBN 88-429-1202-6 L'arcimago Lork (2002) ISBN 88-429-1225-5 La Fortezza (2003) ISBN 88-429-1245-X La Rocca dei Silenzi (2005) ISBN 88-429-1357-X Enlaces externos Sitio del autor (en italiano). Escritores de Italia del siglo XXI Novelistas de Italia del siglo XXI Escritores en italiano del siglo XXI Escritores de literatura fantástica de Italia Nacidos en Trieste
__label__es Allobates melanolaemus Publicación original Grant & Rodríguez, 2001 : Two new species of frogs of the genus Colostethus (Dendrobatidae) from Peru and a redescription of C. trilineatus (Boulenger, 1883). American Museum Novitates, n.º3355, p. 1-24 Referencias Enlaces externos melanolaemus
__label__es Sericytochromatia es una clase de bacterias. Ha sido identificado en un pozo de metano de lecho de carbón, en una biopelícula de biorreactor de laboratorio y en sedimentos modificados con acetato. Referencias Sericytochromatia
__label__es Chas es una población y comuna francesa, situada en la región de Auvernia, departamento de Puy-de-Dôme, en el distrito de Clermont-Ferrand y cantón de Vertaizon. Demografía Referencias Enlaces externos INSEE Localidades de Puy-de-Dôme
__label__es «Holyanna» Es el Tercer Sencillo del álbum Isolation de la banda de rock Toto Lanzado en 1985. La canción fue escrita por Jeff Porcaro y David Paich, el cual canta la canción. Personal Fergie Fredericksen: Coros David Paich: Teclados y Voz Principal Steve Lukather: Guitarra,Coros Jeff Porcaro: Batería Steve Porcaro: Teclados Mike Porcaro: Bajo Canciones de Toto Canciones en inglés
__label__es Acanthocobitis rubidipinnis es una especie de peces de la familia Balitoridae en el orden de los Cypriniformes. Morfología • Los machos pueden llegar alcanzar los 8 cm de longitud total. Distribución geográfica Se encuentran en Asia: Birmania y la India. Hábitat Es un pez de agua dulce y de clima tropical (23 °C-25 °C). Referencias Enlaces externos AQUATAB Balitoridae
__label__es Ji Qinghua (1972) es una deportista china que compitió en halterofilia. Ganó una medalla de plata en el Campeonato Mundial de Halterofilia de 1990, en la categoría de . Palmarés internacional Referencias Halterófilos de la República Popular China
__label__es Santa Cruz de Cuca es una localidad ubicada en la comuna de Chillán, en la Región de Ñuble, Chile. Se ubica a tres kilómetros de la localidad de Quinchamalí, cerca de la confluencia de los ríos Itata y Larqui. La principal actividad económica se debe a la alfarería local a base de greda, cual es compartida con la localidad de Quinchamalí. Asimismo destaca la agricultura del trigo, cual es celebrado en la "Cruz del Trigo de Santa Cruz de Cuca", también conocida como "Fiesta del Trigo", ceremonia instaurada en 2015, cual cuenta con el apoyo de la iglesia católica. Por otro lado, se desarrollan en la zona emprendimientos de producción de ají, lana, cervecerías artesanales y, a partir de sus cepas ancestrales, destinos de Enoturismo en la viña Keltrewe y Viña Santa Cruz de Cuca. Referencias Localidades de la Provincia de Diguillín Chillán
__label__es El Seven de la República de 1984 fue la cuarta edición del torneo de rugby 7 de fin de temporada para uniones regionales afiliadas a la Unión Argentina de Rugby. Se llevó a cabo el 6 y 7 de octubre en las instalaciones del Club de Gimnasia y Esgrima de Buenos Aires, sede San Martín. Se decidió en esta temporada que el torneo debería ser organizado por alguna de las uniones del interior cada vez que Buenos Aires fuese sede de los partidos finales del Campeonato Argentino de Mayores. La Unión Cordobesa de Rugby se quedó con su primer título luego de vencer en la final a la Unión Entrerriana de Rugby 16-12, el primer campeonato en no ser ganado por un seleccionado de la UAR. Este torneo mantiene el récord de haber sido la edición que reunió la menor cantidad de participantes: 12. Equipos participantes Participaron del torneo doce equipos: diez uniones regionales y dos seleccionados representativos de la Unión Argentina de Rugby. Fase final Final Véase también Campeonato Argentino de Mayores 1984 Campeonato Argentino Juvenil 1984 Referencias 1984 Deporte en Argentina en 1984 Rugby en la provincia de Buenos Aires Rugby en 1984
__label__es Brušperk es una localidad del distrito de Frýdek-Místek en la región de Moravia-Silesia, República Checa, con una población estimada a principio del año 2018 de . Se encuentra ubicada en el extremo este de la región y del país, a poca distancia al este del nacimiento del río Óder, y cerca de la frontera con Polonia, Eslovaquia y la región de Zlín. Referencias Enlaces externos Localidades de la región de Moravia-Silesia
__label__es Östgötalagen o Ley de los Godos del Este fue uno de los códices de leyes más antiguos de Suecia, vinculado a la antigua tradición oral de los lagman y vigente principalmente en Östergötland, además de Kinda, Ydre, Vedbo, Tjust (y sus pequeñas dependencias) y Öland, que citaban las leyes en la asamblea local llamada Lionga thing, y que se celebraba en Linköping. Los primeros registros datan de finales del ; tuvo su equivalente en Västergötland con la ley de los Godos del Oeste, aunque ambos son presuntamente mucho más antiguos, pues hay registros de la existencia de al menos dos códices escritos, hoy perdidos. Véase también Thing de todos los gautas Referencias Bibliografía Östgötalagen Med Förklaringar (2010), BiblioBazaar, ISBN 1148541055 ÖSTGÖTA-LAGEN (1980), Lund, Walter Ekstrands bokförlag. Enlaces externos Östgötalagen Códices Derecho germánico Suecia en la Edad Media Libros de derecho
__label__es Brady es un lugar designado por el censo ubicado en el condado de Grays Harbor en el estado estadounidense de Washington. En el año 2000 tenía una población de 645 habitantes y una densidad poblacional de 35,0 personas por km². Geografía Brady se encuentra ubicado en las coordenadas . Demografía Según la Oficina del Censo en 2000 los ingresos medios por hogar en la localidad eran de $67.386, y los ingresos medios por familia eran $72.750. Los hombres tenían unos ingresos medios de $45.764 frente a los $30.625 para las mujeres. La renta per cápita para la localidad era de $20.857. Alrededor del 5,9% de la población estaban por debajo del umbral de pobreza. Referencias Enlaces externos Localidades de Washington Localidades del condado de Grays Harbor (Washington) Lugares designados por el censo en Washington
__label__es Oerlikon era una empresa suiza que, entre otros productos, fabricaba artillería antiaérea y que fue fundada en 1906 como una fábrica de máquinas-herramienta, la Schweizerische Werkzeugmaschinenfabrik Oerlikon (SWO). En 1923 la empresa adquirió una fábrica en Alemania, comenzando su expansión. En 1936 fundó una empresa completamente dedicada a la fabricación y al desarrollo de armas antiaéreas llamada Contraves AG (en latín contra aves). En 1939 funda la empresa aeronáutica Pilatus Flugzeugwerke. Desde enero de 2009 Oerlikon-Contraves es conocida como Rheinmetall Air Defence AG y emplea 2100 trabajadores en todo el mundo, Es una subsidiaria de Rheinmetall-DeTec AG, el mayor fabricante alemán de armamento. Oerlikon se hizo famosa por su cañón automático Oerlikon 20 mm, utilizado durante la Segunda Guerra Mundial y todavía en uso hoy en día en numerosas fuerzas armadas. Copias y derivados de sus diseños fueron empleadas por fabricantes alemanes, franceses, estadounidenses, británicos y japoneses. Enlaces externos Sitio Oficial (redirige a Rheinmetall) Sitio Oficial (de Canadá) Rheinmetall-DeTec, Rheinmetall Empresas de Suiza Empresas de defensa
__label__es Reus Transport Públic S.A. o Reus Transport es una empresa pública dedicada a la explotación del transporte público urbano gestionada por el Ayuntamiento de Reus. Líneas Líneas Especiales L-35: Servicio especial Todos los Santos. Plaza de las Ocas - Cementerio L-70: Bus nocturno. Plaza de las Ocas - Principales espacios de ocio nocturno (Actualmente sin servicio) L-80: Servicio especial EXPO-REUS. Plaza de la Libertad - Fira de Reus L-81: Servicio especial Parque de Navidad. Plaza de la Libertad - Parque de Navidad Enlaces externos Reus Transport, página web oficial. Empresas públicas de España
__label__es Teresa Rohmann (Núremberg, 24 de julio de 1987) es una deportista alemana que compitió en natación. Ganó cinco medallas en el Campeonato Europeo de Natación en Piscina Corta, en los años 2003 y 2004. Participó en los Juegos Olímpicos de Atenas 2004, ocupando el quinto lugar en la prueba de estilos. Palmarés internacional Referencias Nadadores de Alemania Nadadores de Alemania en los Juegos Olímpicos de Atenas 2004 Nadadores de estilo combinado Nacidos en Núremberg
__label__es José Fernández-Portal Fradejas, fallecido en Santiago de Compostela el 13 de mayo de 1942, fue un abogado, político y periodista español, de origen gallego. Trayectoria Estudió Derecho en la Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, fue presidente de la Junta Carlista de Santiago de Compostela. Terciario franciscano, estuvo muy influido por el pensamiento de Juan Vázquez de Mella, del que se considera discípulo y continuador. Fue diputado provincial. Durante la Segunda República fue presidente de la Unión Regional de Derechas de Santiago de Compostela y de la asociación Defensores de Santiago, constituida en 1933. Fue redactor de El Pensamiento Español, colaboró en El Debate, El Correo de Galicia, Vida Gallega y El Compostelano. Recibió la cruz roja del Mérito Militar. Vida personal Casó con Luisa Ladrón de Guevara. Notas Carlistas de Galicia Periodistas carlistas Fallecidos en 1942 Políticos de Galicia Periodistas de Galicia Diputados provinciales de La Coruña
__label__es Ytterby es un pueblo en la isla de Resarö, en el archipiélago de Estocolmo, en Suecia. Pertenece a la municipalidad de Vaxholm. El pueblo es famoso por la mina de Ytterby, donde se descubrieron algunas tierras raras. Entre ellas se encuentran los elementos químicos erbio, terbio, iterbio, e itrio, todos ellos nombrados en homenaje al pueblo, el gadolinio (nombrado en homenaje al profesor finlandés Johan Gadolin), el holmio (por el nombre latino de Estocolmo), y el tulio (de "Thule", nombre antiguo de Escandinavia). Localidades de la provincia de Estocolmo
__label__es Biagio Bartalini (1750, Torrita di Siena - 1822, Siena ) fue un médico y botánico italiano. Bartalini fue el director del Jardín botánico desde 1782 a 1822, transformando el antiguo (fundado en 1588) en un Jardín Botánico de la Universidad apto para didáctica e investigación. Lo enriquece con mil especies nuevas. Bartalini ocupa la cátedra de Ciencias naturales en 1786. Publica en 1776 Catalogo delle piante dei dintorni di Siena donde es uno de los primeros en utilizar en Italia la nomenclatura propuesta por C. von Linneo (1707-1778). Fue presidente de la "Académie des Fisiocritici" de 1815 a 1819. Referencias Aldo Mieli (ed.) Gli scienziati italiani dall'inizio del medio evo ai nostri giorni: repertorio biobibliografico dei filosofi, matematici, astronomi, fisici, chimici, naturalisti, biologi, medici, geografi italiani. Tomo 1, Leonardo da Vinci, Roma 1923 Enciklopedija Jugoslavije, 1ª ed. tomo 8, 1971 Enlaces externos Profesores de Italia Botánicos de Italia del siglo XVIII Botánicos de Italia del siglo XIX Escritores en italiano del siglo XIX Médicos de Italia del siglo XVIII Nacidos en la provincia de Siena Fallecidos en Siena
__label__es Udobne (ucraniano: Удобне) es una localidad del Raión de Odesa en el Óblast de Odesa de Ucrania. Según el censo de 2001, tiene una población de 1947 habitantes. Enlaces externos Localidades del Raión de Odesa
__label__es Mâlain es una población y comuna francesa, en la región de Borgoña, departamento de Côte-d'Or, en el distrito de Dijon y cantón de Sombernon. Demografía Referencias Enlaces externos INSEE Malain
__label__es Tema New Town es una ciudad de la región Gran Acra de Ghana. En marzo de 2000 tenía una población estimada de . Se encuentra ubicada al sureste del país, al sur del lago Volta y junto a la costa del golfo de Guinea. Referencias Enlaces externos Región Gran Acra Localidades de Ghana
__label__es Tyrannochthonius fiskei es una especie de arácnido del orden Pseudoscorpionida de la familia Chthoniidae. Distribución geográfica Se encuentra en Tennessee (Estados Unidos). Referencias Fiskei Arácnidos de Estados Unidos
__label__es Lista de los campeones del Campeonato de Wimbledon de 1999: Individual Masculino Pete Sampras (USA) d. Andre Agassi (USA), 6-3, 6-4, 7-5 Individual Femenino Lindsay Davenport (USA) d. Steffi Graf (GER), 6-4, 7-5 Dobles Masculino Mahesh Bhupathi/Leander Paes (IND) d. Paul Haarhuis (NED)/Jared Palmer (GBR), 6-7(10), 6-3, 6-4, 7-6(4) Dobles Femenino Lindsay Davenport/Corina Morariu (USA) d. Mariaan de Swardt (RSA)/Elena Tatarkova (UKR), 6-4, 6-4 Dobles Mixto Campeonato de Wimbledon 1999
__label__es Pipistrellus aero es una especie de murciélago de la familia Vespertilionidae. Distribución geográfica Se encuentra en Norori en Kenia, y posiblemente en Etiopía , pero sin confirmación. Referencias JACOBS, D.; COTTERILL, F.P.D.; TAYLOR, P.J. 2008. Pipistrellus aero. In: IUCN 2008. 2008 IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Bibliografía SIMMONS, N. B. Order Chiroptera. In: WILSON, D. E.; REEDER, D. M. (Eds.). Mammal Species of the World: A Taxonomic and Geographic Reference. 3. ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2005. v. 1, p. 312-529. aero
__label__es Dr. Ruth Segomotsi Mompati es un distrito municipal de Sudáfrica en la Provincia del Noroeste. Su nombre hace referencia a Ruth Mompati, política y embajadora sudáfricana. Ruth Mompati fue considerada heroína y luchadora antiapartheid en su país. El centro administrativo es la ciudad de Vryburg. Demografía Según datos oficiales contaba con una población total de 463.815 habitantes. Referencias Dr. Ruth Segomotsi Mompati
__label__es Isla Esabo (en francés: île Esabo) es una isla en el río Congo, que se encuentra en la República Democrática del Congo, cerca de la localidad de Yamonongeri, aguas arriba de la isla Elumba. La Isla Esabo es de casi 30 km de longitud y se localiza en las coordenas geográficas . Véase también Geografía de la República Democrática del Congo Geografía de África Enlaces externos Mapa de localización de la Isla Referencias Islas del río Congo Islas fluviales de la República Democrática del Congo
__label__es Reußenköge (; ) es una Gemeinde y aldea situada en el distrito de Frisia Septentrional, en el norteño estado federado de Schleswig-Holstein (Alemania), con una población a finales de 2016 de unos . Administrativamente parte de Bredstedt, la población se encuentra ubicada al noroeste del estado, cerca de la costa del mar del Norte y no lejos de la frontera con Dinamarca. Referencias Enlaces externos Localidades del distrito de Frisia Septentrional
__label__es Luquet es una comuna y población de Francia, en la región de Mediodía-Pirineos, departamento de Altos Pirineos, en el distrito de Tarbes y cantón de Ossun. Su población en el censo de 1999 era de 305 habitantes. Está integrada en la Communauté de communes du Canton d'Ossun. Demografía Referencias Enlaces externos Localidades de Altos Pirineos
__label__es Leonardo Lázaro (Cúcuta, Norte de Santander, Colombia; 12 de abril de 1993) es un futbolista colombiano. Juega de centrocampista. Clubes Enlaces externos Ficha en Fichajes Ficha en Soccerway Nacidos en Cúcuta Futbolistas de Colombia Futbolistas del Águilas Doradas Rionegro Futbolistas del Cúcuta Deportivo Futbolistas del Valledupar Fútbol Club Futbolistas del Unión Magdalena Futbolistas del Atlético Huila Futbolistas del Real Cartagena
__label__es Cheux era una comuna francesa situada en el departamento de Calvados, de la región de Normandía, que el 1 de enero de 2017 pasó a ser una comuna delegada de la comuna nueva de Thue-et-Mue al fusionarse con las comunas de Bretteville-l'Orgueilleuse, Brouay, Le Mesnil-Patry, Putot-en-Bessin y Sainte-Croix-Grand-Tonne. Demografía Los datos demográficos contemplados en este gráfico de la comuna de Cheux se han cogido de 1800 a 1999 de la página francesa EHESS/Cassini, y los demás datos de la página del INSEE. Referencias Enlaces externos Cheux Cheux
__label__es La revista Epopeya fue fundada en 1997 por César Fuentes Rodríguez cuando se distanció de la dirección de Madhouse por desacuerdos con la línea editorial que ésta había tomado en aquellos tiempos. Epopeya se dedicó al Heavy Metal más tradicional así como a subgéneros concretos como el Hard Rock, el Metal Progresivo, el Power Metal y el Metal Gótico. Llegaron a editarse 44 números, antes de que la debacle del corralito y el desastre económico que sufrió la Argentina en 2001, pusiera fin a esta y a muchas otras publicaciones. En muchos de los números, la revista vino acompañada por un CD del programa radial Ave César —conducido por el propio César Fuentes Rodríguez— con alrededor de una docena de canciones y un folleto adjunto que incluía información y una viñeta histórica sobre la Roma Antigua. Luego de la desaparición de la revista Epopeya en 2004, varios de sus antiguos miembros fundaron una nueva publicación llamada Requiem. Referencias Revistas_de_heavy_metal_de_Argentina Revistas_de_rock_de_Argentina Heavy metal de Argentina Epopeya Revistas en español Enlaces externos Revista Requiem
__label__es Tebas puede hacer referencia a las siguientes ciudades de la Antigüedad: Tebas de Egipto, capital del Imperio Medio y del Imperio Nuevo. Tebas de Grecia, la ciudad más importante de Beocia. Tebas Hipoplacia de Asia Menor, una ciudad situada en el noroeste de Anatolia. Tebas, también en Asia Menor, pero en la región de Jonia. Tebas de Ftiótide, otra antigua ciudad griega, de la región de Tesalia. También puede hacer referencia al ciclo poético mitológico Los siete contra Tebas. Además, a Javier Tebas, presidente de la Liga española de fútbol. Enlaces externos
__label__es Presentación previa Marius Copil fue el campeón defensor, pero cayó derrotado en cuartos de final ante Jürgen Melzer. Jürgen Melzer derrotó en la final a Márton Fucsovics. Cabezas de serie Lukáš Lacko (Baja) Sergiy Stakhovsky (Primera ronda) Marius Copil (Cuartos de final) Thomas Fabbiano (Primera ronda) <ol start=5> Yevgueni Donskoi ''(Primera ronda) Norbert Gombos ''(Segunda ronda) Lee Duck-hee ''(Primera ronda) Luca Vanni ''(Cuartos de final) Cuadro Cuadro final Cuadro superior Cuadro inferior Referencias Cuadro principal Cuadro clasificatorio Challenger de Budapest 2017
__label__es «Don Juan» es una canción de la cantante colombiana Fanny Lu en colaboración con el dúo Chino y Nacho, es el tercer sencillo extraído de su álbum de estudio de 2011, Felicidad y Perpetua, fue lanzada como sencillo el 2 de octubre de 2012. También sirvió como primer sencillo promocional del primer álbum recopilatorio de la cantante colombiana: Voz y Éxitos, dado a conocer el 10 de diciembre de 2012. En marzo de 2012, durante una entrevista, Fanny Lu reveló que «Don Juan» sería el tercer single. El 2 de octubre de ese año fue lanzada de manera oficial, . Audio El audio de la canción fue colgado en la página oficial de Fanny Lu en YouTube el 22 de noviembre de 2011 junto a los demás audios del álbum Felicidad y Perpetua. El video llegó en tan sólo 2 semanas a 1,8 millones de visitas en el canal oficial pero fue bloqueado, sin embargo, cuenta con más de 4 millones de visitas en canales no oficiales. Presentaciones en Vivo Fanny Lu interpretó por primera vez la canción el 11 de diciembre de 2012 junto a Chino y Nacho en vivo desde La Voz Colombia. Canciones en español Sencillos de 2012 Canciones de pop
__label__es En álgebra lineal, la diagonal principal de una matriz cuadrada contiene los elementos situados desde hasta . Es decir, los elementos que van desde la esquina superior izquierda hasta la esquina inferior derecha: , , ... . Uso Se usa el término de diagonal principal, por ejemplo, en la definición de matriz diagonal, que es una matriz cuadrada, en la que todos los elementos que no están en la diagonal principal son cero. La suma de los elementos de la diagonal principal de una matriz se denomina traza de dicha matriz. Ejemplo La siguiente matriz diagonal contiene sólo números uno en su diagonal principal. Su traza es Referencias Main diagonal en Mathwords Matrices
__label__es Norma Nichols (7 de enero de 1894-27 de noviembre de 1989) fue una actriz estadounidense que trabajó en películas mudas. Apareció en 42 películas entre 1914 y 1922. También apareció en varias películas de Larry Semon. Era hermana de la actriz Marguerite Nichols quién se casó con el actor, director, y productor Hal Roach. Biografía Norma Nichols nació el 7 de enero de 1894 en Santa Ana, California. Tuvo papeles importantes en películas como The Ne'er-Do-Well (1916), Ham and the Hermit's Daughter (1916) y The Tides of Barnegat (1917). Murió el 27 de noviembre de 1989 en Los Ángeles, California. Filmografía parcial Dough and Dynamite (1914) The Property Man (1914) Fatty's Jonah Day (1914) Fatty's Tintype Tangle (1915) The Ne'er-Do-Well (1916) Ham and the Hermit's Daughter (1916) The Tides of Barnegat (1917) The Legion of Death (1918) The Rent Collector (1921) The Bakery (1921) The Bell Hop (1921), existente The Fall Guy (1921) The Call of Home (1922) Referencias Enlaces externos Actrices de Estados Unidos del siglo XX Actrices de cine de Estados Unidos
__label__es Açoreira es una freguesia portuguesa del municipio de Torre de Moncorvo, con 23,97 km² de superficie y 526 habitantes (2001). Su densidad de población es de 21,9 hab/km². Enlaces externos Açoreira en freguesiasdeportugal.com Gobierno civil e información administrativa del Distrito de Braganza Freguesias de Torre de Moncorvo
__label__es Yllenus rotundiorificus es una especie de araña saltarina del género Yllenus, familia Salticidae. Fue descrita científicamente por Logunov & Marusik en 2000. Habita en Mongolia. Referencias Bibliografía Logunov, D. V. & Marusik, Y. M. (2003a). A revision of the genus Yllenus Simon, 1868 (Arachnida, Araneae, Salticidae). KMK Scientific Press, Moscow, 168 pp. rotundiorificus
__label__es El XLV Campeonato Europeo de Lucha se celebró en el año 1993 en dos sedes distintas. Las competiciones de lucha grecorromana y de lucha libre masculina en Estambul (Turquía) y las de lucha libre femenina en Ivánovo (Rusia). Fue organizado por la Federación Internacional de Luchas Asociadas (FILA) y las correspondientes federaciones nacionales de los países sedes respectivos. Resultados Lucha grecorromana masculina Lucha libre masculina Lucha libre femenina Medallero Referencias Enlaces externos Base de datos de la FILA . 1993 Lucha en 1993
__label__es Paul Michael Lyons (Dublín, 31 de marzo de 1969-Melbourne, 8 de septiembre de 2019) fue un deportista australiano que compitió en taekwondo. Ganó dos medallas de bronce en el Campeonato Asiático de Taekwondo en los años 1986 y 1988. Palmarés internacional Referencias Practicantes de taekwondo de Australia Nacidos en Dublín
__label__es Ars-Laquenexy es una población y comuna francesa, en la región de Lorena, departamento de Mosela, en el distrito de Metz-Campagne y cantón de Pange. Demografía Enlaces externos INSEE Elecciones municipales de 2008 Ars Laquenexy
__label__es Carlos D'Ovidio (La Plata, n. ca. 1950) es un cantante de música folklórica de Argentina, que integró el Quinteto Vocal Tiempo, antecedente directo del grupo llamado Quinteto Tiempo desde 1972. Trayectoria Carlos D'Ovidio integró durante entre 1968 y 1969 el Quinteto Vocal Tiempo, reemplazando a Miguel Ángel Coloma, integrándolo entonces junto con Alejandro Jáuregui, Eduardo Molina, Sara Masi y Guillermo Masi. El grupo fue fundado en 1966. Entre las actuaciones en las que participó se destaca el espectáculo La Tercera Fundación de Buenos Aires, sobre textos de Armando Tejada Gómez, en el Teatro Ópera de La Plata y el debut del grupo en el Festival de Cosquín, el más importante de la música folklórica de Argentina, en enero de 1969. En 1969 dejó el grupo siendo reemplazado por Rodolfo Larumbe. Véase también Música de Argentina Música folklórica de Argentina Historia de la música folklórica de Argentina Fuentes Referencias Enlaces externos Cantantes masculinos de Argentina Cantantes de folclore de Argentina Músicos de la ciudad de La Plata Cantantes en español Platenses
__label__es Il giocatore (título original en italiano; en español, El jugador) es un intermezzo en tres partes con música de Luigi Cherubini y libreto de Antonio Salvi escrito medio siglo antes para ser musicado por Giuseppe Maria Orlandini. Compuesta por un Cherubini de aún 15 años de edad, esta pequeña ópera fue puesta en escena en Florencia en el año 1775. Esta obra fue el producto del grandioso éxito obtenido por Orlandini en el año 1715, cuando representó el mismo tema bajo el nombre de Bacocco e Serpilla (más conocido como Il marito giocatore e la moglie bacchettona). Desde entonces en adelante, el intermedio de Orlandini fue objeto de varias reposiciones, varias veces revisada, y el mismo texto sufrió a menudo nuevas musicaciones, entre las cuales estuvo esta de Cherubini. Actualmente se representa muy poco. En las estadísticas de Operabase aparece con solo una representación en el período 2005-2010. Enlaces externos Breve sinopsis de Il giocatore Óperas de Luigi Cherubini Óperas en italiano Óperas de 1775 Óperas estrenadas en Florencia
__label__es Suhuvate (ucraniano: Сухувате) es un pueblo del Raión de Bolhrad en el Óblast de Odesa de Ucrania. Según el censo de 2001, tiene una población de 82 habitantes. Referencias Localidades del Raión de Bolhrad
__label__es Louis Martin fue un jugador de waterpolo y nadador francés. Ganó tres medallas de bronce en los Juegos Olímpicos de París 1900, en Waterpolo, incluso obtuvo medalla de bronce en dos disciplinas, como los 4000 metros libres y 200 metros libres en equipos y terminó noveno y quinto en los 200 m y 1000 m en natación modalidad libre, respectivamente. Referencias Nadadores olímpicos Deportistas de Lille
__label__es Ledio Beqja (Castiglione del Lago, 18 de junio de 2001) es un futbolista italiano, nacionalizado albanés, que juega en la demarcación de centrocampista para el KF Teuta Durrës de la Superliga de Albania. Trayectoria Tras formarse como futbolista en el FK Sukthi, y posteriormente en el KF Teuta Durrës, finalmente el 23 de enero de 2019 debutó con el primer equipo en la Copa de Albania contra el KS Lushnja, encuentro que finalizó con un resultado de 1-3 a favor del conjunto del Teuta. Su debut en liga se produjo cuatro meses después, el 26 de mayo, contra el KS Kastrioti Krujë. Clubes Palmarés Campeonatos nacionales Referencias Enlaces externos Ficha del jugador en footballdatabase Ficha del jugador en soccerway Personas de Umbría Futbolistas de Albania Futbolistas del KS Teuta Durrës Futbolistas de la selección de fútbol sub-17 de Albania Futbolistas de la selección de fútbol sub-19 de Albania
__label__es .pa es el dominio de nivel superior geográfico (ccTLD) para Panamá. Véase también DNS Lista de dominios de Internet Enlaces externos IANA - .pa Registrar dominios .PA pa Comunicaciones en Panamá sv:Toppdomän#P
__label__es Oxmul es un yacimiento arqueológico maya localizado al oriente de la ciudad de Mérida, Yucatán. Se encuentra cercano a las poblaciones de Chichí Suárez y Sitpach. Consta de varias plataformas e incluso en una estructura se hallaron urnas funerarias (ollas) y sistas (sarcófagos) correspondientes a individuos de diversas edades y ambos sexos, algunas de ellas con ofrendas. Fueron en total 75 entierros. Algunas subestructuras ceremoniales a manera de altares tienen forma circular y tienen estuco. Se encontraron también cuatro maquetas en las que destaca una pirámide de arquitectura Petén y varios templos mayas las cuales presuntamente representan alguna población cercana (Thó) o la tierra de origen de los habitantes. Tales maquetas están asociadas a una cueva natural. Se hallaron vestigios de cerámica de la región de Usumacinta y Guatemala, lo que hace fechar el lugar en el Clásico Tardío. Galería Enlaces externos Vestigios mayas en Los Héroes Revelan 'secretos' sobre tumbas de niños mayas Yacimientos arqueológicos de la cultura maya en México Yacimientos arqueológicos del estado de Yucatán Toponimia maya
__label__es Hlohovec es una localidad del distrito de Břeclav en la región de Moravia Meridional, República Checa, con una población estimada a principio del año 2018 de . Se encuentra ubicada al sur de la región, a poca distancia al sur de Brno, y cerca de la orilla del río Dyje —un afluente del río Morava que, a su vez, lo es del Danubio— y de la frontera con Austria y Eslovaquia. Referencias Enlaces externos Localidades de la región de Moravia Meridional
__label__es RWM son las siglas de Read-Write Memory (memoria de lectura-escritura). Se trata de un tipo de memoria de fácil lectura y escritura. La memoria de lectura-escritura es un tipo de memoria de computadora en la que se puede escribir y de la que se puede leer con relativa facilidad, es decir, utilizando señales eléctricas normalmente asociadas a la ejecución de un software, y sin ningún otro proceso físico (a diferencia de la ROM o la memoria de sólo lectura y distinta de la EEPROM). El término relacionado RAM (para "memoria de acceso aleatorio") significa algo diferente; se refiere a la memoria que puede acceder a cualquier lugar de la memoria en una cantidad de tiempo constante. El término también podría referirse a las ubicaciones de memoria que tienen permisos de lectura y escritura. En los sistemas informáticos modernos que utiliza la segmentación de la memoria, cada segmento tiene una longitud y un conjunto de permisos (por ejemplo, lectura, escritura, ejecución) asociados a él. Referencias Véase también RAM MRAM ROM PROM EPROM EEPROM RWM
__label__es Pseudaristus es un género de coleópteros adéfagos de la familia Carabidae. Especies Comprende las siguientes especies: Pseudaristus modestus Schaum, 1858 Pseudaristus punctatissimus Baudi di Selve, 1894 Referencias Enlaces externos Pseudaristus en ION Nomenclator Zoologicus Ditomina
__label__es Stuartfield es una localidad situada en el concejo de Aberdeenshire, en Escocia (Reino Unido), con una población estimada a mediados de 2016 de . Se encuentra ubicada al este de Escocia, cerca de la costa del mar del Norte y de la ciudad de Aberdeen. Referencias Enlaces externos Localidades de Aberdeenshire
__label__es En diciembre de 2017, la Asamblea General votó a favor de celebrar una reunión plenaria de alto nivel sobre la paz mundial en honor al centenario del nacimiento del primer presidente e ícono mundial elegido democráticamente, Nelson Mandela. El 24 de septiembre se celebrará la Cumbre por la Paz de Nelson Mandela, y se espera que los Estados Miembros adopten una Declaración Política redactada a lo largo del año. El texto declara 2019-2028 el "Decenio de Paz de Nelson Mandela" y hace un llamamiento a todos los líderes mundiales para "hacer posible lo imposible" y "redoblar los esfuerzos para lograr la paz y la seguridad internacionales, el desarrollo y los derechos humanos". Referencias Véase también Cumbre por la Paz de Nelson Mandela Enlaces externos Sitio Oficial del Decenio de Paz de Nelson Mandela Decenios de las Naciones Unidas Nelson Mandela Introducciones de 2017
__label__es El término Fiorella o Fiorela es de origen italiano y el significado del nombre es florecita o flor pequeña; puede referirse a: Fiorella Aíta, exjugadora de voleibol peruana. Fiorella Bonicelli, tenista uruguaya. Fiorella Cayo, cantante, bailarina y actriz peruana. Fiorella Corimberto, balonmanista argentina. Fiorella Díaz, actriz y presentadora peruana. Fiorella D'Croz Brusatin, deportista colombiana de Triatlón. Fiorella Faltoyano, actriz española. Fiorella Flores, actriz y modelo peruana. Fiorella Mannoia, cantante italiana. Fiorella Mattheis, actriz, modelo y presentadora brasileña. Fiorella Migliore, modelo, actriz, conductora y reina de belleza paraguaya. Fiorella Molinelli, economista y política peruana. Fiorella Rodríguez, actriz y conductora peruana. Fiorella Sargenti, periodista y conductora argentina. Fiorela Duranda, actriz argentina. Enlaces externos Origen y significado del nombre Fiorella. Nombres italianos Nombres femeninos
__label__es es un actor y seiyū japonés, afiliado a Sigma Seven. Estuvo casado con la también seiyū Junko Sakuma, quien falleció en 2011. Filmografía Anime Alejandro Corner (Gundam 00) Goury Gabriev (Slayers) Guy Cecil (Tales of the Abyss) Hiroshi Nakano (Gravitation) Jack el destripador (Shanghai Yomakikai CD Drama) Jean Havoc (Fullmetal Alchemist) Juna (Futari wa Pretty Cure) Katori Yuutaro (Taiyō no Yūsha Faibādo) Rey Donuts (Yes! PreCure 5 GoGo!) Rui Napoleon (Shin Captain Tsubasa ) Ryo (Chōon Senshi Bōguman) Scarface (Shadow Skill) Shinji Yasuoka (Shion no Ō) Shogo Ohgi (Idol Densetsu Eriko) Wataru Akiyama (Initial D) Westar (Fresh Pretty Cure) Padre de Mayoi (Monogatari Series Second Season, ep 8) Eren Kruger (Shingeki no Kyojin) OVAs Takashi Yokokawa y Toshiki Kamishima (Shōnan Jun'ai Gumi) Kōsaku Ogata (Seikimatsu Darling) Películas Knucles the Echidna (Sonic the Hedgehog: The Movie) Referencias Enlaces externos Perfil oficial en Sigma Seven (en japonés) Yasunori Matsumoto en Anime News Network Yasunori Matsumoto en Base de datos Hitoshi Doi Seiyū masculinos
__label__es Munjava Modruška es una localidad de Croacia en el municipio de Josipdol, condado de Karlovac. Geografía Se encuentra a una altitud de 375 a 109 km de la capital nacional, Zagreb. Demografía En el censo 2011, el total de población de la localidad fue de 63 habitantes. Referencias Enlaces externos Este artículo contiene datos geográficos extraídos de Google Earth. Localidades del condado de Karlovac
__label__es Perry es una ciudad ubicada en el condado de Walker en el estado estadounidense de Georgia. En el año 2000 tenía una población de 3.511 habitantes. Geografía Perry se encuentra ubicada en las coordenadas (34.976459, -85.291070). Según la Oficina del Censo, la localidad tiene un área total de , de la cual es tierra y (0.00%) es agua. Demografía Según la Oficina del Censo en 2000 los ingresos medios por hogar en la localidad eran de $23,612, y los ingresos medios por familia eran $29,423. Los hombres tenían unos ingresos medios de $26,346 frente a los $21,875 para las mujeres. La renta per cápita para la localidad era de $14,175. Referencias Ciudades de Georgia (Estados Unidos) Localidades del condado de Walker (Georgia)
__label__es Wellsville es una ciudad ubicada en el condado de Cache en el estado estadounidense de Utah. En el año 2000 tenía una población de 2.728 habitantes. Wellsville se localiza dentro de los límites metropolitanos de la ciudad de Logan. Geografía Wellsville se encuentra ubicado en las coordenadas . Según la Oficina del Censo, la localidad tiene un área total de , de la cual 0,35% es agua. Demografía Según la Oficina del Censo en 2000, habían 2.729 personas y 686 familias residentes en el lugar, 97.29% de los cuales eran personas de raza blanca. Según la Oficina del Censo en 2000 los ingresos medios por hogar en la localidad eran de $49,115, y los ingresos medios por familia eran $51,023. Los hombres tenían unos ingresos medios de $37,244 frente a los $21,750 para las mujeres. La renta per cápita para la localidad era de $16,171. Alrededor del 6.4% de la población estaban por debajo del umbral de pobreza. Referencias Enlaces externos Localidades de Utah Localidades del condado de Cache
__label__es Oculicosa supermirabilis es una especie de araña araneomorfa de la familia Lycosidae. Es el único miembro del género monotípico Oculicosa. Es originaria de Kazajistán. Referencias Enlaces externos En ION Nomenclator Zoologicus Lycosidae
__label__es Auburn es un pueblo ubicado en el condado de Fond du Lac en el estado estadounidense de Wisconsin. En el Censo de 2010 tenía una población de 2.352 habitantes y una densidad poblacional de 25,4 personas por km². Geografía Auburn se encuentra ubicado en las coordenadas . Según la Oficina del Censo de los Estados Unidos, Auburn tiene una superficie total de 92.6 km², de la cual 90.28 km² corresponden a tierra firme y (2.51%) 2.32 km² es agua. Demografía Según el censo de 2010, había 2.352 personas residiendo en Auburn. La densidad de población era de 25,4 hab./km². De los 2.352 habitantes, Auburn estaba compuesto por el 98.17% blancos, el 0% eran afroamericanos, el 0.6% eran amerindios, el 0.17% eran asiáticos, el 0.17% eran isleños del Pacífico, el 0.43% eran de otras razas y el 0.47% pertenecían a dos o más razas. Del total de la población el 1.02% eran hispanos o latinos de cualquier raza. Referencias Enlaces externos Pueblos de Wisconsin Localidades del condado de Fond du Lac
__label__es Białobrzegi [bjawɔˈbʐɛɡi] es un pueblo ubicado en el distrito administrativo de Gmina Kock, dentro del condado de Lubartów, voivodato de Lublin, en Polonia oriental. Se encuentra aproximadamente a 3 kilómetros al suroeste de Kock, a 23 kilómetros al noroeste de Lubartów, y a 45 kilómetros al norte de la capital regional Lublin. Referencias Enlaces externos Localidades del voivodato de Lublin
__label__es El Regimiento de Infantería N.º 23 "Copiapó" o Regimiento de Infantería "Copiapó", fue creado por Decreto Supremo N° 368 del 1 de octubre de 1974 bajo el nombre de Regimiento de Infantería Motorizada N.º 23 "Copiapó". El 21 de julio de 1981 se le dio su actual nombre Regimiento de Infantería N.º 23 "Copiapó". Perteneciente a la I División de Ejército, esta unidad táctica tiene su guarnición en la ciudad de Copiapó y está conformada por: Batallón de Infantería N°1 "Atacama" Compañía de morteros 1ª Compañía de fusileros 2ª Compañía de fusileros 3ª Compañía de fusileros Compañía de Plana Mayor y logística Referencias Infanteria 23 Copiapó Unidades militares creadas en 1974
__label__es Hillsboro es un pueblo ubicado en el condado de Vernon en el estado estadounidense de Wisconsin. En el Censo de 2010 tenía una población de 807 habitantes y una densidad poblacional de 8,79 personas por km². Geografía Hillsboro se encuentra ubicado en las coordenadas . Según la Oficina del Censo de los Estados Unidos, Hillsboro tiene una superficie total de 91.84 km², de la cual 91.72 km² corresponden a tierra firme y (0.13%) 0.12 km² es agua. Demografía Según el censo de 2010, había 807 personas residiendo en Hillsboro. La densidad de población era de 8,79 hab./km². De los 807 habitantes, Hillsboro estaba compuesto por el 97.52% blancos, el 0% eran afroamericanos, el 0.5% eran amerindios, el 0.25% eran asiáticos, el 0% eran isleños del Pacífico, el 0.25% eran de otras razas y el 1.49% pertenecían a dos o más razas. Del total de la población el 0.62% eran hispanos o latinos de cualquier raza. Referencias Enlaces externos Pueblos de Wisconsin Localidades del condado de Vernon (Wisconsin)
__label__es Matías Maximiliano Jara (Trelew, Chubut, Argentina, 6 de abril de 1987) es un futbolista argentino. Juega de delantero y su equipo actual es el Sportsman del Torneo Federal B. Clubes Palmarés Distinciones individuales Futbolistas de la provincia de Chubut Futbolistas del Club Atlético Chacarita Juniors Futbolistas del Club Deportivo Huachipato en los años 2010 Futbolistas del Club Deportivo Godoy Cruz Antonio Tomba
__label__es Dejan Kovačević (Múnich, 27 de diciembre de 1996) es un jugador de baloncesto bosbio-alemán. Mide 2,09 metros de altura y ocupa la posición de Ala-Pívot. Pertenece a la plantilla del Bayer Giants Leverkusen de la ProA, la segunda división alemana. Carrera En 2013 fichó por el Bayern Múnich. En la temporada 2014-2015 fue campeón de la NBBL, promediando un doble-doble (18 puntos por partido y 10.5 rebotes), además de participar con el equipo de la Regionalliga Südost. En la primavera de 2015 debutó con la Sub-20 alemana. Enlaces externos Ficha en la web del Bayern Ficha en DBB Ficha en Eurobasket.com Ficha en Basketball.RealGM Ficha en Euroleague.net Baloncestistas de Alemania Baloncestistas de Bosnia y Herzegovina Baloncestistas del Bayern Munich Baloncestistas del s.Oliver Baskets Baloncestistas del Phantoms Braunschweig Baloncestistas del Bayer Leverkusen Personas de Múnich
__label__es La Liga Nacional de Ascenso Clausura 2018, por motivo de patrocinio Liga Ascenso Cable Onda LPF - Torneo Clausura 2018 fue la finalización de la temporada 2017-18 de la segunda división de Panamá. Buscando mayor competencia y que los equipos tengan más posibilidades de obtener puntos se cambió del formato de grupos al de todos contra todos. Este torneo arrancó el viernes 21 de enero de 2018 y el campeón esta por definirse. Equipos participantes Equipos por Provincia: Calendario eliminatorio <center> Fútbol en 2018 Panamá en 2018 2018
__label__es Ambehta es un pueblo y nagar Panchayat situado en el distrito de Saharanpur en el estado de Uttar Pradesh (India). Su población es de 15739 habitantes (2011). Demografía Según el censo de 2011 la población de Ambehta era de 15739 habitantes, de los cuales 8146 eran hombres y 7593 eran mujeres. Ambehta tiene una tasa media de alfabetización del 62,27%, inferior a la media estatal del 67,68%: la alfabetización masculina es del 69,75%, y la alfabetización femenina del 54,25%. Referencias Localidades del distrito de Saharanpur
__label__es La trinchera infinita es una película española de 2019 dirigida por Jon Garaño, Aitor Arregi y José Mari Goenaga y protagonizada por Antonio de la Torre y Belén Cuesta. La película se inspiró en Manuel Cortés, alcalde de la localidad malagueña de Mijas durante la Segunda República Española, quien vivió oculto treinta años y cuya vida fue relatada en el documental de 2011 30 años de oscuridad de Manuel H. Martín. Fue rodada en Higuera de la Sierra, municipio de la provincia de Huelva. Sinopsis Al estallar la guerra civil española, Higinio (Antonio de la Torre) se ve obligado a ocultarse en su casa por miedo a ser fusilado por los franquistas. Su encierro durará treinta años, los cuales compartirá con Rosa, su esposa (Belén Cuesta). Premios y nominaciones Reparto Véase también Mambrú se fue a la guerra Topo (Guerra Civil Española) Decreto Ley de indulto de 1969 Referencias Películas sobre la guerra civil española Películas con temática LGBT de España Películas dirigidas por varios directores Higuera de la Sierra Películas de España presentadas para el Óscar a la mejor película internacional
__label__es {{Ficha de taxón |name = Citriobatus |image = Gardenology.org-IMG 0713 hunt07mar.jpg |image_caption = C. multiflorum |regnum = Plantae |unranked_divisio = Angiosperms |unranked_classis = Eudicots |unranked_ordo = Asterids |ordo = Apiales |familia = Pittosporaceae |genus = Citriobatus|genus_authority = A.Cunn. ex Loudon |subdivision_ranks = Especies |subdivision = Ver texto |}}Citriobatus es un género de grandes arbustos nativos de Australia. Algunos autores aún lo consideran un sinónimo de Pittosporum Banks ex Gaertn. Taxonomía El género fue descrito por A.Cunn. ex Loudon y publicado en Synopsis Pittosporearum 4. 1839. La especie tipo no ha sido designada. Especies Citriobatus lancifolius F.M.Bailey Citriobatus linearis (F.M.Bailey) C.T.White Citriobatus papuanus Schodde Citriobatus pauciflorus A.Cunn. ex Benth. Citriobatus spinescens'' (F.Muell.) Druce Referencias Enlaces externos Pittosporaceae
__label__es Las Adobas es un despoblado medieval en el término municipal de Cabra, (provincia de Teruel). Historia e historia Formó parte de la Encomienda de Montalbán de la Orden de Santiago. Es mencionado como Adovas en "Rationes decimarum Hispaniae (1279-80): Aragón y Navarra": Bibliografía Luis del Romero, Antonio Valera: Territorios abandonados. Paisajes y pueblos olvidados de Teruel. Rolde de Estudios Aragoneses-CEDDAR y Instituto de Estudios Turolenses, 2013. Despoblados de la provincia de Teruel Castel de Cabra
__label__es Henri Debehogne (1928-2007) fue un astrónomo belga que trabajaba en el Real Observatorio de Bélgica, en Uccle, especializado en cometas y asteroides. Descubrió más de 700 asteroides, incluyendo dos troyanos, uno de ellos en colaboración con Eric Walter Elst. En su honor fue denominado el asteroide (2359) Debehogne. Véase también Anexo:Astrónomos y astrofísicos notables Referencias Astrónomos de Bélgica
__label__es El Internazionali di Tennis Città di Trieste es un torneo profesional de tenis. Pertenece al ATP Challenger Tour. Se juega desde el año 2020 sobre pistas de tierra batida en Trieste, Italia. Palmarés Individuales Dobles Véase también ATP Challenger Tour Referencias Enlaces externos Trieste Torneos de tenis en tierra batida
__label__es Ildico (también transcrito Hildico, Hildiko o Ildiko; fl. ) fue una princesa germana, última esposa del rey huno Atila. Biografía Su nombre, aunque corrompido por el paso de fuentes en griego a latín, sugiere una procedencia goda, y probablemente era ostrogoda. En 453, Atila se hallaba en Panonia en una fiesta en un palacio de madera junto al río Tisza para celebrar su unión con Ildico. Después de la fiesta Atila subió a sus aposentos y a la mañana siguiente sus hombres le encontraron en el suelo en un charco de sangre y a Ildico en un rincón llorando. No se conocen con exactitud la causas de la muerte de Atila, aunque se ha especulado con la posibilidad de una grave hemorragia nasal o una hemorragia interna después de beber en exceso, causada por varices esofágicas. La ubicación de los restos de Atila sigue siendo desconocida, y es uno de los grandes misterios de la historia. Referencias Véase también Atila Huno Período de las grandes migraciones Hunos Ostrogodos Consortes reales Mujeres del siglo V Atila
__label__es La Selección de baloncesto de Gambia es el equipo que representa al país en las competiciones internacionales y es controlada por la Asociación de Baloncesto de Gambia. Historia Fue creada en el año 1972 y su primera participación en un torneo oficial fue en el FIBA Africa Championship en 1978 en el que terminaron en noveno lugar. A pesar de contar con varios jugadores en equipos de Europa, no han participado en una competición oficial desde el Campeonato Africano de 2005. Jugadores Jugadores destacados Pierre Jallow Referencias Enlaces externos Presentation on Facebook Archived records of Gambia team participations Gambia Baloncesto Baloncesto en Gambia
__label__es Bassaniodes caperatoides es una especie de araña cangrejo del género Bassaniodes, familia Thomisidae. Fue descrita científicamente por Levy en 1976. Distribución Esta especie se encuentra en Israel. Referencias caperatoides Arácnidos descritos en 1976 Arácnidos de Israel
__label__es Risa Wataya(japonés:綿矢 りさ, Kioto, 1 de febrero de 1984) escritora japonesa. Editó su primera a los 17 años y ganó el premio Bungei 2001. En 2003 ganó el prestigioso premio Akutagawa. Estudió en la Universidad de Waseda. Obra インストール (Install). Kawade Shobo Shinsha Publishing Co., 2001. ISBN 4-309-01437-2 蹴りたい背中 (Keritai senaka). Kawade Shobo Shinsha Publishing Co., 2003. ISBN 4-309-01570-0 夢を与える (Yume wo ataeru). Kawade Shobo Shinsha Publishing Co., 2007.ISBN 978-4309018041 勝手にふるえてろ (Katte ni furuetero). Bungeishunju Ltd.,2010. ISBN 978-4-16-329640-1 かわいそうだね？ (Kawaisou da ne? Bungeishunju Ltd.,2010. ISBN 978-4-16-380950-2 Referencias Escritores de Japón del siglo XXI Escritores en japonés Nacidos en Kioto
__label__es Setanta puede hacer referencia a: Setanta, nombre originario de la figura mitológica irlandesa Cúchulainn. Setanta Sports, cadena de televisión deportiva. Setanta Sports Cup, torneo organizado por Setanta Sports. Setanta Records, sello discográfico. Setenta en idioma catalán.
__label__es Cordia croatii es una especie de árbol en la familia Boraginaceae. Es nativa de Centroamérica. Descripción Son árboles que alcanzan un tamaño de hasta 20m de altura; con las ramitas casi glabras a esparcidamente estrigulosas. Las hojas persistentes, perennifolias; láminas de 5.7-8.2 × 3-5cm, elípticas a elíptico-ovadas; pecíolos de 6-12mm. Inflorescencias de 8-12cm de ancho, terminales, cimosas, las ramas esparcidamente pardo-estrigulosas a ferrugíneo-puberulentas. Flores bisexuales, monomorfas; cáliz campanulado, los lobos ovados y redondeados en el ápice; corola blanca, tubular con los lobos reflexos. Frutos en forma de drupas, con el cáliz persistente, el pireno 8-11 × 6-8mm, desigual y anchamente ovoide, el endocarpo óseo, 1-locular. Taxonomía Cordia croatii fue descrita por James Spencer Miller y publicado en Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 75(2): 471–474, f. 3. 1988. Etimología Cordia: nombre genérico otorgado en honor del botánico alemán Valerius Cordus (1515-1544). croatii: epíteto otorgado en honor del botánico estadounidense Thomas Bernard Croat. Referencias croatii Flora de América Central Plantas descritas en 1988 Plantas descritas por J.S.Mill.
__label__es Las lenguas defoides son una rama propuesta dentro de las lenguas Níger-Congo y que posteriormente fue desechada como grupo filogenético, sinedo las lenguas "defoides" reclasificadas dentro del grupo YEAI de las lenguas Volta-Níger. El nombre del grupo se deribaba del hecho de que todos los grupos étnicos que hablaban lenguas defoides consideraban que la ciudad de Ilé Ifè como su lugar de origen (defoide = èdè ('lengua') + ifè (Ife) + -oide). Actualmente estas lengua se han reclasificado dentro de dos ramas, las lenguas yoruboides y el akoko, que aunque relacionados distantemente, hoy no se consideran más cercanos entre sí de lo que ambos están con las lenguas igboides o las lenguas edoides. El acrónimo YEAI se usa para designar al provisionalmente al grupo tentativo formado por estos cuatro grupos: Yoruboide, Edoide, Akoko e Igboide). Referencias Enlaces externos Niger–Congo languages spoken in Nigeria Lenguas Volta-Níger
__label__es La Frecha es una localidad del municipio de Camaleño (Cantabria, España). En el año 2008 tenía 27 habitantes (INE). La localidad está ubicada a 380 metros de altitud sobre el nivel del mar, en la margen derecha del río Deva y a 2 kilómetros de la capital municipal, Camaleño. Formó parte del antiguo Concejo de Valdebaró. De su arquitectura destaca la ermita de Nuestra Señora de la O. Fuentes Pascual Madoz, Diccionario geográfico-estadístico-histórico de España y sus posesiones de Ultramar. Madrid, 1845-1850. Edición facsímil por Ámbito Ediciones, S.A. y Librería Estudio. Valladolid, 1984. Frecha
__label__es Un receptor de melatonina es un receptor acoplado a proteína G (GPCR) cuyo ligando es la melatonina. Se han clonado tres tipos de receptores de melatonina. El MT1 (o Mel1A o MTNR1A) el MT2 (o Mel1B o MTNR1B) están presentes en humanos y otros mamíferos, mientras que el subtipo adicional Mel1C (o MTNR1C) se ha identificado en anfibios, aves y peces Patrones de expresión En mamíferos, los receptores de melatonina se encuentran en el encéfalo y en algunos órganos periféricos. Aunque hay una considerable variación en la densidad y localización de la expresión de receptores entre las distintas especies. El subtipo MT1 se encuentra en la pars tuberalis de la hipófisis y en el núcleo supraquiasmático del hipotálamo. El subtipo MT2 se encuentra principalmente en la retina. El subtipo Mel1C de vertebrados no mamíferos se expresa en muchas áreas cerebrales. Ligandos selectivos Agonistas Agomelatina Melatonina Ramelteon Tasimelteon LY-156,735 Antagonistas Luzindole - N-Acetyl-2-benzyltryptamine, CAS# 117946-91-5 Referencias Enlaces externos Receptores acoplados a proteínas G Receptores celulares Genes del cromosoma 4 Genes del cromosoma 11
__label__es Ayub Idrisi (23 de octubre de 1994) es un deportista marroquí que compitió en judo. Ganó una medalla de plata en el Campeonato Africano de Judo de 2014 en la categoría de . Palmarés internacional Referencias Judokas de Marruecos
__label__es Poblado de Algar es un pueblo rural perteneciente al municipio de Carcabuey. Está situado en el sur de la provincia de Córdoba, dentro del Parque natural de las Sierras Subbéticas. Localidades de la provincia de Córdoba (España) Carcabuey
__label__es Marvell Wynne II (Pittsburgh, Pensilvania, Estados Unidos, 8 de mayo de 1986) es un futbolista estadounidense. Juega como lateral derecho y actualmente milita en los San Jose Earthquakes de la Major League Soccer. Su padre fue jugador en las Grandes Ligas de Béisbol. Selección nacional Ha sido internacional con la selección de fútbol de los Estados Unidos, ha jugado 5 partidos internacionales. Trayectoria Palmarés Campeonatos nacionales Referencias Futbolistas de Estados Unidos Futbolistas de Estados Unidos en los Juegos Olímpicos de Pekín 2008 Futbolistas de Estados Unidos en la Copa FIFA Confederaciones 2009 Futbolistas de los New York Red Bulls Futbolistas del Toronto FC Futbolistas del Colorado Rapids Futbolistas del San Jose Earthquakes Primeras Selecciones del SuperDraft de la MLS Nacidos en Pittsburgh
__label__es Anna Rose Watkins (nacida Anna Rose Bebington, Leek, 13 de febrero de 1983) es una deportista británica que compitió en remo. Participó en dos Juegos Olímpicos de Verano, obteniendo dos medallas, bronce en Pekín 2008 y oro en Londres 2012, en la prueba de doble scull. Ganó cuatro medallas en el Campeonato Mundial de Remo entre los años 2007 y 2011. Palmarés internacional Referencias Remeros del Reino Unido Remeros del Reino Unido en los Juegos Olímpicos de Pekín 2008 Remeros del Reino Unido en los Juegos Olímpicos de Londres 2012 Medallistas olímpicos de oro de remo Medallistas olímpicos de bronce de remo Medallistas olímpicos de oro del Reino Unido Medallistas olímpicos de bronce del Reino Unido Medallistas olímpicos de bronce de Pekín 2008 Medallistas olímpicos de oro de Londres 2012 Campeones mundiales de remo Británicas del siglo XXI Deportistas femeninas del Reino Unido Remeras Nacidos en Leek (Staffordshire)
__label__es Sakul Kumtan es un deportista tailandés que compitió en atletismo adaptado. Ganó una medalla de plata en los Juegos Paralímpicos de Seúl 1988 en la prueba de lanzamiento de jabalina (clase A3A9). Palmarés internacional Referencias Atletas con discapacidad de Tailandia Medallistas paralímpicos de plata de Tailandia
__label__es Las relaciones Egipto-Uruguay son las relaciones exteriores entre Egipto y Uruguay. Egipto tiene una embajada en Montevideo. Uruguay tiene una embajada en El Cairo y un consulado en Alejandría. Ambos países son miembros del Grupo de los 77. Comercio En las relaciones comerciales, Egipto es un socio comercial importante para Uruguay, con más de 26 millones de dólares en ventas de soja; Egipto es también un importante comprador de corderos uruguayos. Desde 2004 existe un Acuerdo Marco entre Egipto y los países del Mercosur. Cultura Montevideo tiene un pequeño Museo Egipcio Antiguo, Celebrada por la Sociedad Uruguaya de Egiptología (establecida en 1980); a notable Uruguayan Egyptologist is Juan José Castillos. Hay un Centro Egipcio para la Cultura Islámica en Montevideo. Referencias Relaciones Egipto-Uruguay
__label__es Tyler Patrick Jones (California, 12 de marzo de 1994) es un actor estadounidense conocido por su papel como Ned Banks en la serie Ghost Whisperer en la CBS Television Studios. Filmografía G-Force (2009) - Connor The Spiderwick Chronicles (2008) Ben 10: Race Against Time (2007) - Cash Minority Report (2002) - Sean Anderton (6 años) Red Dragon (2002) - Josh Graham Silver Lake (2004) - Dennis Patterson de joven Fathers and Sons (2005) - Nick 10-12 años Bad News Bears (2005) - Timothy Lupus Feast (2005) - Cody Yours, Mine and Ours (2005) - Michael Beardsley Televisión Family Law : (2000) - Tommy Pierce Judging Amy : (2002) - Kevin Weston Summerland: (2002-2004) - Chris Crossing Jordan : (2005) - Young Brian Heeley Ghost Whisperer : (2006-2008) - Ned Banks Private Practice : (2008) - Dean Anuncios Hallmark (2001) - Daniel Macy's Super Saturday Sale (2002) Home Depot (2003) Walt Disney World: Magical Gatherings (2003) Yahoo (2006) Dairy Queen (2008) Enlaces externos Web oficial Actores de cine de Estados Unidos Actores de televisión de Estados Unidos Personas de California
__label__es Didrik Ferdinand Didrichsen (1814–1887) fue un botánico, y médico danés. Participó como botánico en la primera "Expedición Galathea", entre 1845 a 1847, circunnavegando el planeta. Su padre Rasmus Didrichsen (-1839) era carpintero, y se casó el 20 de noviembre de 1838 con Marie Louise Müller. En 1875, sucedió a Anders Sandøe Ørsted como profesor de botánica en la Universidad de Copenhague, y como director de su Jardín Botánico, que lo hizo muy conocido y al cual Eugen Warming lo enriqueció aún más. Al retirase jubilado Didrichsen en 1885, Warming lo sucedió en ambas posiciones. Honores Eponimia (Cyperaceae) Fimbristylis didrichsenii Boeckeler (Euphorbiaceae) Croton didrichsenii G.L.Webster (Myrtaceae) Myrcia didrichseniana Kiaersk. Véase también Anexo:Naturalistas y epónimos Referencias Enlaces externos Botánicos de Dinamarca del siglo XIX Exploradores de Asia Alumnado de la Universidad de Copenhague Profesores de la Universidad de Copenhague Plantas descritas por Didrichsen Nacidos en Copenhague
__label__es Nikka Graff Lanzarone (Los Ángeles; 20 de noviembre de 1983) es una actriz, cantante y bailarina estadounidense. Carrera Graff se graduó en el Conservatorio de Boston con una licenciatura en Teatro Musical. Su primera actuación profesional después de su graduación fue en Peepshow, de Jerry Mitchell, en Las Vegas. Broadway vio su debut como Marisa en Mujeres al borde de un ataque de nervios, basada en la película de Pedro Almodóvar del mismo nombre. Su última actuación en Broadway fue en Chicago en el papel de la icónica Velma Kelly. Créditos en Broadway Broadway Chicago (2011) Mujeres al borde de un ataque de nervios (2010) Off-Broadway Hello Again (2011) Seussical The Musical (2011) Filmografía Cine y televisión Referencias Enlaces externos Video de Nikka Graff Debut de Nikka Graff Lanzarone en Broadway Actrices de teatro de Estados Unidos Actrices de cine de Estados Unidos Actrices de televisión de Estados Unidos Actrices judías Cantantes judíos Ateos judíos
__label__es Esquilo puede referirse a varios conceptos: Personas Esquilo, (526 a. C. – 456 a. C.), dramaturgo griego. Es considerado el primer gran representante de la tragedia griega. Esquilo de Atenas, rey de Atenas, hijo de Agamestor. Esquilo de Alejandría (fl. s. II a. C.), poeta épico. Esquilo de Suecia (fl. s. XI), monje anglosajón misionero en Suecia, mártir y santo católico. Divisiones administrativas El Esquilo, aldea de la parroquia de Piñera, concejo de Castropol, Asturias, España. Astronomía (2876) Esquilo, asteroide del cinturón de asteroides que orbita entre Marte y Júpiter. Su nombre hace referencia al dramaturgo griego Esquilo.
__label__es El Cadarso fue un destructor de la Armada Española. Al igual que los tres acorazados de clase España, los tres destructores de clase Bustamante fueron construidos como fruto del plan Ferrándiz, ley de 7 de enero de 1908 (D.O. n.º 5, de 8-1-1908), que preveía un determinado número de unidades en España, con el fin de acortar el abismo tecnológico existente con el resto de las potencias europeas. Recibió su nombre en memoria del Capitán de Navío, ascendido póstumamente a Almirante, Luis Cadarso y Rey, fallecido durante la Batalla de Cavite (Guerra Hispano-Estadounidense). Fue el primer buque bautizado en honor a este héroe de la Armada, a quien también le fue dedicado uno de los patrulleros de la Clase Lazaga, el P-03. Historial Durante la Primera Guerra Mundial, participó en misiones de vigilancia y patrulla de las costas españolas. Véase también Referencias Enlaces externos Cadarso Todoavante Barcos construidos en Cartagena Destructores de clase Bustamante Buques de guerra de los años 1910
__label__es El gavilancito chico o azor menor africano (Accipiter minullus) es una especie de ave accipitriforme de la familia Accipitridae. Está muy extendido a través Angola, Botsuana, Burundi, República Democrática del Congo, Eritrea, Etiopía, Kenia, Lesoto, Malaui, Malí, Mozambique, Namibia, Ruanda, Somalia, Sudáfrica, Sudán, Suazilandia, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia y Zimbabue. Es el ave más pequeña del género Accipiter y es posiblemente el miembro más pequeño de la familia Accipitridae. Referencias Enlaces externos BirdLife Especies, Ficha técnica. (en inglés) minullus Aves de África Taxones descritos por François Marie Daudin Animales descritos en 1800
__label__es Þórvaldr Hjaltason (Thorvald) fue un escaldo de Islandia al servicio del rey Erico el Victorioso de Suecia. Participó en la batalla de Fýrisvellir contra Styrbjörn el Fuerte y sus jomsvikings. Tras la victoria, el rey Erico mandó construir túmulos en Gamla Uppsala y prometió una gran premio a quien pudiera componer un poema sobre tal victoria. Entre sus filas se encontraba Þórvaldr Hjaltason, quien inmediatamente compuso un poema, por el cual recibió como recompensa un brazalete de oro. A partir del triunfo en la batalla, el rey Erico fue conocido como "el Victorioso": Los dos lausavísur de Þórvaldr: Posiblemente otros poemas de Styrbjarnar þáttr Svíakappa sean de su autoría. Referencias Poetas de Islandia Vikingos de Islandia Poetas del siglo X Escaldos vikingos Islandeses del siglo X
__label__es La Catedral de Santa María o simplemente Catedral de Kilkenny (en inglés: St Mary's Cathedral) es la iglesia catedral de la diócesis de Ossory. Se encuentra en Kilkenny, en Irlanda. Santa María fue diseñada por William Deane Butler (c.1794-1857). Fue elegida por el Obispo William Kinsella (1793-1845) promotor de la construcción de Santa María, en febrero de 1842. Las obras se iniciaron en abril de 1843 y se terminaron en 1857. El domingo 4 de octubre de 1857 tuvo lugar su apertura, que consistió de una gran ceremonia de dos horas y tres cuartos que se inició a las 6:15. La construcción tuvo un coste estimado se estima de 25000 £. Santa María está hecha de piedra caliza cortada que se extrajo localmente. La catedral tiene una planta cruciforme y su estilo se describe como del primer gótico inglés. Véase también Iglesia católica Procatedral de Santa María (Dublín) Referencias Catedrales católicas de Irlanda Arquitectura de Irlanda del siglo XIX Kilkenny
__label__es Eso es porque eres una chica.
__label__es Yo estaba en las montañas.
__label__es Eso no va a pasar.
__label__es Una vez quise ser astrofísico.
__label__es Esto es lo que yo habría dicho.
__label__es Ahora, Muiriel tiene 20 años.
__label__es Eso sería algo que habría que programar.
__label__es Eso es intrigante.
__label__es Quizás sea lo mismo para él.
__label__es Yo no tengo una cuenta en estos foros.
__label__es Todo el mundo debe aprender por sí mismo al final.
__label__es Deberías dormir.
__label__es Ella pregunta cómo es posible eso.
__label__es Por alguna razón, me siento más vivo por la noche.
__label__es ¿Cuántos amigos íntimos tienes?
__label__es Creo que tengo una teoría sobre eso.
__label__es No sé si tengo tiempo.
__label__es La contraseña es "Muiriel".
__label__es Eso es porque no quieres estar solo.
__label__es No puedo vivir así.
__label__es Eres tan impaciente conmigo.
__label__es La educación en este mundo me decepciona.
__label__es Cuando me desperté estaba triste.
__label__es Era un conejo malo.
__label__es ¿Qué es eso?
__label__es Yo pensaba que te gustaba aprender cosas nuevas.
__label__es ¡¡No quiero ser patético, quiero ser guay!!
__label__es Deseo poder ir a Japón.
__label__es ¡No, no lo soy! ¡Lo eres tú!
__label__es No soy un artista. Nunca tuve mente para ello.
__label__es No soy un pez de verdad, sólo soy un peluche.
__label__es No tengo la intención de ser egoísta.
__label__es Tengo que irme a dormir.
__label__es ¡¡Él está pateándome!!
__label__es Me tomaría una eternidad explicarte todo.
__label__es Volveré pronto.
__label__es Estoy tan gordo.
__label__es Hay un problema que no ves.
__label__es Desafortunadamente es verdad.
__label__es Creo que lo mejor es no ser maleducado.
__label__es Eso depende del contexto.
__label__es Me tengo que ir a la cama.
__label__es ¡Puedes hacerlo!
__label__es Por fin está más o menos explicado.
__label__es ¡Yo sólo lo digo!
__label__es ¿Cuánto tiempo estuviste?
__label__es Es la cosa más estúpida que he dicho nunca.
__label__es Gano 100 € al día.
__label__es No te preocupes.
__label__es Entonces tenemos un problema...
__label__es No puedo decírselo ahora. Ya no es tan simple.
__label__es Tú simplemente huyes de los problemas de la vida.
__label__es No es importante.
__label__es No tengo palabras.
__label__es No sabía de dónde venía eso.
__label__es Siempre me he preguntado cómo será tener hermanos.
__label__es Para hacer eso, tienes que arriesgarte.
__label__es ¿Estás seguro?
__label__es Yo seré infeliz, pero no me suicidaría.
__label__es ¿Es una foto reciente?
__label__es ¡Date prisa!
__label__es Así ha sido siempre.
__label__es Eso va a costar 30 €.
__label__es ¿Qué estás haciendo?
__label__es ¿Entonces qué?
__label__es ¡Feliz cumpleaños, Muiriel!
__label__es Voy a pegarle un tiro.
__label__es Eso no va a cambiar nada.
__label__es No te preguntaré más por hoy.
__label__es La mayoría de la gente cree que estoy loco.
__label__es Simplemente no sé qué decir...
__label__es No me gustaba.
__label__es Los humanos nunca fueron hechos para vivir eternamente.
__label__es América es un lugar encantador para vivir, si estás aquí para ganar dinero.
__label__es Algunas veces no puedo evitar mostrar mis sentimientos.
__label__es La última persona a la que le conté mi idea pensó que yo estaba loco.
__label__es Si pudiera enviarte un malvavisco, Trang, lo haría.
__label__es Si alguien fuera a preguntar cuál es el objetivo de la historia, realmente no lo sé.
__label__es Quizás me dé pronto por vencido y en lugar de eso me eche una siesta.
__label__es Por alguna razón, el micrófono no había funcionado hasta entonces.
__label__es Si buscas las letras, realmente no significan mucho.
__label__es Están muy ocupados peleándose entre ellos, como para preocuparse por los ideales comunes.
__label__es Me voy a esforzar por no molestarte en tus estudios.
__label__es Sólo puedo preguntarme si acaso es lo mismo para todos los demás.
__label__es Todas las personas que están solas, están solas porque tienen miedo de los demás.
__label__es La mayoría de la gente escribe sobre su vida cotidiana.
__label__es Cuando yo estaba en el instituto me levantaba a las 6 todas las mañanas.
__label__es Creo que nuestra convivencia ha influenciado tu forma de vida.
__label__es El aprendizaje no debe ser forzado, sino estimulado.
__label__es Si el mundo no fuera como es, yo podría confiar en cualquiera.
__label__es Cada vez que encuentro algo que me gusta, es demasiado caro.
__label__es Es una tarea difícil elegir qué está "bien" o "mal", pero has de hacerlo.
__label__es Eso fue probablemente lo que influenció su decisión.
__label__es Yo puedo ser antisocial, pero eso no significa que no hable con la gente.
__label__es Es una palabra para la que me gustaría encontrar una sustituta.
__label__es Soy una persona que tiene muchos defectos, pero esos defectos pueden ser corregidos fácilmente.
__label__tr Kozmetoloji, insan vücudunun epiderma, tırnaklar, kıllar, saçlar, dudaklar ve dış genital organlar gibi değişik dış kısımlarına, dişlere ve ağız mukozasına uygulanmak üzere hazırlanmış, tek veya temel amacı bu kısımları temizlemek, koku vermek, görünümünü değiştirmek ve/veya vücut kokularını düzeltmek ve/veya korumak veya iyi bir durumda tutmak olan saç boyaları ve saç açıcılar da dahil bütün preparatları veya maddeleri inceleyen ve geliştiren bilim dalıdır Eczacılık Kozmetik
__label__tr Ruel Adrian Fox (d. 14 Ocak 1968), orta saha pozisyonunda görev yapan İngiliz kökenli Montserratlı millî futbolcu ve teknik direktör. Profesyonel kariyerine 1986 yılında Norwich City kulübünde başladı. Daha sonra sırasıyla Newcastle United, Tottenham Hotspur, West Bromwich Albion kulüplerinde oynadı. Montserrat millî futbol takımı formasıyla çıktığı 2 maçta 1 gol kaydetmiştir. Dış bağlantılar 1968 doğumlular Yaşayan insanlar İngiliz futbolcular Montserratlı futbolcular Orta saha futbolcuları Norwich City FC futbolcuları Newcastle United FC futbolcuları Tottenham Hotspur FC futbolcuları West Bromwich Albion FC futbolcuları Montserrat millî futbol takımı futbolcuları English Football League futbolcuları Premier League futbolcuları İngiliz teknik direktörler Montserrat millî futbol takımı teknik direktörleri
__label__tr Dani Anwar (22 Şubat 1968-3 Ağustos 2020) Senatör olarak görev yapan Endonezyalı politikacı. 3 Ağustos 2020'de COVID-19 nedeniyle öldü. Kaynakça Endonezya'da COVID-19 pandemisinden ölenler Endonezyalı siyasetçiler 2020 yılında ölenler 1968 doğumlular
__label__tr Sahra Demokratik Arap Cumhuriyeti devlet başkanı, Afrika kıtasında bulunan ve varlığı kısmen tanınan Sahra Demokratik Arap Cumhuriyeti'nin bağımsızlık ilanının yapıldığı 1976 yılından bu yana ülkenin en üst makamında yer alan kişiye verilen unvandır. Ülkenin bağımsızlığını ilan ettiği Batı Sahra bölgesinin büyük çoğunluğu Fas'ın kontrolü altında tutulduğu için ülke Cezayir'de bulunan Tindouf şehrindeki mülteci kamp alanında sürgünde ülkeyi yönetebilmektedir. Ülkenin bağımsızlığını kazandığı 27 Şubat 1976 tarihinden 16 Ekim 1982 tarihine kadar ülkenin en üst makamı Devrim Konseyi Başkanı olarak adlandırılmaktaydı. Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Dünya Devlet Adamları - Sahra Demokratik Arap Cumhuriyeti Devlet başkanı listeleri
__label__tr 1989 Copa América 1 Temmuz-16 Temmuz 1989 tarihleri arasında CONMEBOL tarafından Brezilya'da düzenlenmiştir. 10 takımın katıldığı turnuvayı 4. kez ev sahibi takım olan Brezilya kazandı. Katılan Ülkeler Arjantin Bolivya Ekvador Kolombiya Paraguay Peru Şili Uruguay Venezuela Stadyumlar Birinci tur A Grubu B Grubu Final turu Sonuç Golcüler 6 gol Bebeto 4 gol Rubén Sosa Carlos Maldonado 3 gol Romário Arnoldo Iguarán 2 gol Claudio Caniggia Juvenal Olmos Buenaventura Ferreira Adolfino Cañete Alfredo Mendoza Gustavo Neffa Jorge Hirano Antonio Alzamendi Enzo Francescoli Santiago Ostolaza 1 gol Baltazar Geovani Fernando Astengo Juan Carlos Letelier Jaime Pizarro Jaime Ramírez Oscar Reyes Antony de Ávila René Higuita Ney Avilés Hermen Benítez Franco Navarro Juan Reynoso Ruben Paz Kendi kalesine gol José del Solar Dış bağlantılar CONMEBOL Resmi Sitesi RSSSF Copa América 1989
__label__tr Keppeki Danshi! Aoyama-kun (; "Temizlik Erkeği! Aoyama-kun"), Taku Sakamoto tarafından yazılan bir manga serisidir. Seri, Mayıs 2014-Ocak 2018 tarihleri arasında Shueisha'nın önce Miracle Jump ve daha sonra Weekly Young Jump dergisinde 13 tankōbon cilt halinde yayınlandı. Studio Hibari tarafından hazırlanan bir anime serisi uyarlaması Temmuz-Eylül 2017 tarihleri arasında yayınlandı. Konusu Dahi bir futbolcu olan lise birinci sınıf öğrencisi Aoyama, aynı zamanda temizlik konusunda oldukça takıntılıdır. Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Manga serileri 2014 mangaları 2017 anime serileri Mangalara dayalı anime serileri Spor anime Komedi anime Okul anime Yaşamdan kesintiler hakkında anime ve manga Futbol televizyon dizileri Seinen Shueisha mangaları Studio Hibari Tokyo Metropolitan Television programları
__label__tr Baron Kjeld Thor Tage Otto Reedtz-Thott (13 Mart 1839 – 27 Kasım 1923) Danimarkalı bir siyasetçi. Højre siyasi partisinin üyesiydi. 1894-1997 yılları arasında Danimarka Konseyi Başkanı (başbakan) sıfatıyla Reedtz-Thott Kabinesinin lideri olarak görev yapıyordu. Kaynakça 1839 doğumlular 1923 yılında ölenler Danimarka başbakanları
__label__tr Morne Trois Pitons Milli Parkı (), Dominika'da, 1997'den beri Dünya Miraslarını Koruma listesindedir. Dominika hükûmeti tarafından doğal park olarak Haziran 1975'te ülkenin ilk yasal doğal parkı olarak kurulmuştur. Park, içinde bulunan en yüksek dağ olan Morne Trois Pitons dağına atfedilerek adlandırılmıştır, üç büyük yükselti anlamına gelmektedir. Parkta hatırı sayılır yoğunlukta volkanik aktivite olmaktadır. Kaynakça Özel Genel Virtual Dominica.com WCMC-UNEP Morne Trois Pitons National Park - UNESCO World Heritage Centre Friends of World Heritage Non profit organization that identifies projects that support local tourism enterprises that can help alleviate poverty and conserve World Heritage sites. IUCN Kategori II Dominika'daki millî parklar Dominika'daki görülecek yerler 1975'te kurulan korumalı bölgeler
__label__tr Şakra (), Suudi Arabistan'ın Riyad Bölgesi'nde bulunan bir şehirdir. Şehir başkent Riyad'ın 190 km kuzeybatısında yer almaktadır. Şehrin nüfusu 2010 yılı itibarı ile 26,651'dir. Kaynakça Riyad Bölgesi'ndeki şehirler‎
__label__tr Roland Schwarz (d. 14 Ağustos 1996), Almanya adına güreşen grekoromen stil güreşçisidir. Kariyeri Norveç'in Oslo kentinde düzenlenen 2021 Dünya Güreş Şampiyonası'nda grekoromen stilde 77 kg'da üçüncülük maçında Belaruslu Tsimur Berdyieu'yi 10-5 yenerek bronz madalya kazandı. Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Dünya Güreş Birliği sayfasında Roland Schwarz (IAT) veritabanındaki sporcu bilgisi Roland Schwarz 1996 doğumlular Yaşayan insanlar Alman erkek güreşçiler Dünya Güreş Şampiyonası madalyalı güreşçiler Avrupa Güreş Şampiyonası madalyalı güreşçiler
__label__tr Dulcidon, Eosen'de Pakistan'da yaşamış dichobunid çift toynaklı cinsi. Cins yalnızca tek bir tür içerir: Dulcidon gandaensis. Kaynakça Dichobunidae Eosen devri çift toynaklıları Leigh Van Valen tarafından adlandırılmış taksonlar 1965'te tanımlanan fosil taksonları Pakistan'da paleontoloji
__label__tr Erdemli, Bingöl ilinin Merkez ilçesine bağlı bir köydür. Tarihçe Köyün eski adı, 1928 yılı kayıtlarında Gözerek olup, Zazaca'da " gozerek" sözcüğü, "cevizlik" anlamına gelmektedir. 1968 yılı kayıtlarında ise Kıltepe ya da Kızıltepe olarak geçmektedir. 2000 yılından sonra bugünkü ismini almıştır. Daha önceleri Elazığ'ın Palu ilçesine bağlıyken, 22 Haziran 1948'de Bingöl merkez ilçeye bağlandı. Coğrafya Köy, Bingöl il merkezine 22 km uzaklıktadır. Nüfus Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Bingöl merkez belde ve köyleri
__label__tr Diyalektik Aklın Eleştirisi (), Jean-Paul Sartre'ın 1960 yılında yazdığı, Varoluşçu Marksizm anlayışını temellendirdiği ve Varlık ve Hiçlik eseri ile beraber en kapsamlı eserlerinden birisidir. İlk biçimi 1957'de bir Polonya dergisinde yayımlanmak üzere hazırlanan Yöntem Araştırmaları eseri, daha sonradan Sartre'ın Varoluşçuluk ve Marksizm anlayışını daha da detaylandırdığı büyük eseri Diyalektik Aklın Eleştirisi'ne bir ön dayanak ve kaynak oluşturmuştur. Ayrıca bakınız Fenomenoloji Varoluşçuluk Jean Paul Sartre Yöntem Araştırmaları Ontoloji Dış bağlantılar Critique of the Critique Table of contents and partial text at Google Books The Dogmatic Dialectic and the Critical Dialectic The Intelligibility of History: Totalisation without a Totaliser Kaynakça 1960 kitapları Ontoloji Fenomenoloji Varoluşçuluk Marksizm
__label__tr Arta İli, Cibuti'nin, Arta Bölgesi'ne bağlı tek ildir. İlin nüfusu, bölgenin nüfusuyla aynıdır ve yaklaşık 7100 kişi civarındadır. Başkenti, Arta'dır. Dikhil İli ve Cibuti İli'yle komşudur. Kaynakça Google Earth Falling Rain.com Ayrıca bakınız Cibuti'nin İlleri Arta Bölgesi Arta, Cibuti Cibuti'nin illeri
__label__tr Yeşildurak, Şanlıurfa ilinin Viranşehir ilçesine bağlı bir mahalledir. Tarihçe Yeşildurak; idari bölüm olarak daha önceleri köy iken, 2012 yılındaki yasa değişikliğinden sonra mahalle olmuştur. Nüfus Kaynakça Viranşehir'in mahalleleri Evrifaessa Bot tarafından oluşturulan mahalle maddeleri
__label__tr Yaylacık, Sivas ilinin Kangal ilçesine bağlı bir köydür. Tarihçe Köyün eski adı, 1928 kayıtlarında Türkçede "koşucu, yörük" anlamına gelen Yortan olarak geçmektedir. Coğrafya Köy, Sivas il merkezine 80 km, Kangal ilçe merkezine 16 km uzaklıktadır. Nüfus Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Kangal belde ve köyleri
__label__tr Carole Ann Ford (d. 16 Haziran 1940) Büyük Britanya bilimkurgu dizisi Doctor Whoda Susan Foreman ve The Day of the Triffids adlı 1962 yapımı filmde Bettina rolüyle tanınan İngiliz oyuncu. Yaşamı ve kariyeri Ford uzun bir kariyere sahiptir ve farklı alanlarda kendini göstermiştir. Birçok tiyatro çalışması, drama ve müzikalde kendisini göstermiştir. Sarah (Fransız oyuncu Sarah Bernhardt'ın hayatı hakkında), The Hiding Place, The Great St Trinian's Train Robbery, Mix Me a Person ve The Day of the Triffids adlı filmlerde oynamıştır. Doctor Who dizisinin yanı sıra Suspense ("Man on a Bicycle" adlı bölümde), Whatever Happened to the Likely Lads? ("Affairs and Relations" adlı bölümde), Public Eye, Emergency Ward 10, Attorney General, Moonstrike, Compact, Probation Officer ve Dial M for Murder adlı dizilerde de oynamıştır. Ford Juke Box Jury adlı bir yarışma sunmuş ve birçok seslendirmede yer almıştır. Filmografi Film Televizyon Video Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar 1940 doğumlular Yaşayan insanlar
__label__tr BUGSAŞ A.Ş., Türkiye merkezli bir ulaşım şirketidir. Şirket, 9 Ekim 1990 tarihinde AGSAŞ adıyla kurulmuş olup Ankara Büyükşehir Belediyesi bünyesinde faaliyet göstermektedir. Şirketin merkezi Ankara'nın Yenimahalle ilçesinde yer almaktadır. BUGSAŞ, Ankara metrosu ile Ankaray, Ankara Şehirlerarası Otobüs Terminali ve teleferiklerin işletilmesinden sorumludur. Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar 1990'da kurulan şirketler Ankara merkezli şirketler Türkiye merkezli ulaşım şirketleri Ankara ilinde toplu taşımacılık Ankara Büyükşehir Belediyesi şirketleri
__label__tr Vladimir Rasate (Bulgarca: Владимир Расате), 889-893 yılları arasında hüküm süren Tuna Bulgar Devleti knezi. 889 yılının başlarında tahttan çekilen ve bir keşiş olarak manastıra kapanan I. Boris'in yerine oğlu Vladimir Rasate geçti. Ancak, o babasının siyasetini terk ederek Fransa kralıyla tekrar anlaştı. Ayrıca, Hristiyanlaşmaya karşı olan Bulgar boylarını desteklemiş, Hristiyan tapınaklarına ve din adamlarına baskı uygulamış ve Hristiyanları takibe girişmiştir. Bu durumdan rahatsız olan Knez Boris-Mihail, 893 yılında Vladimir'i tahttan indirerek yerine diğer oğlu Simeon'u çıkarmıştır. Ayrıca bakınız Tuna Bulgar Devleti Bulgar hükümdarların listesi Kaynakça Андреев, Й. Българските ханове и царе (VII—XIV в.). София, 1987 Dış bağlantılar История на Първото българско Царство. От славянизацията на държавата до падането на Първото царство , Васил Златарски Doğum tarihi bilinmeyenler Ölüm tarihi bilinmeyenler Bulgar hükümdarları 9. yüzyılda Bulgaristan Bulgar-Sırp Savaşları'nda kişiler Krum Hanedanı
__label__tr Monster Hunter: World, Capcom tarafından geliştirilen ve yayınlanan bir aksiyon rol yapma oyunudur ve Monster Hunter serisinin beşinci ana oyunudur. PlayStation 4 ve Xbox One için Ocak 2018'de dünya çapında piyasaya sürüldü. Microsoft Windows sürümü ise Ağustos 2018'de yayımlandı. Notlar Xbox One oyunları Microsoft Windows oyunları İndirilebilir içeriğe sahip video oyunları Japonya'da geliştirilen video oyunları PlayStation 4 Pro geliştirilmiş oyunları PlayStation 4 oyunları Tek oyunculu ve çok oyunculu video oyunları Interactive Achievement Award sahipleri Aksiyon-rol yapma oyunları 2018 video oyunları Tek platform bilgisi içeren video oyunu incelemeleri şablonu kullanılan maddeler
__label__tr Espinhosa Portekiz'de São João da Pesqueira belediyesine bağlı olan, 7,70 km² yüzölçümüne sahip, 161 nüfuslu (2001) bir bucaktır (Portekizce: freguesia). Portekiz'in freguesiaları São João da Pesqueira
__label__tr Richmond ilçesi veya Richmond County Amerika Birleşik Devletleri'nin Virginia eyaletinde bulunan bir ilçedir. İlçenin nüfusu 2010 sayımına göre 9,254'tür. İlçenin merkezi Warsaw şehridir. Kaynakça Virginia'daki iller
__label__tr Kategori 5e kablo veya Cat 5e kablo, megabit hızında veri taşıyan bir UTP kablo türüdür. Cat 5 kablo ile karşılaştırıldığında daha yüksek veri geçişi sağlayabilir. Cat 5 kablo ilk üretildiğinde yumuşak telliydi ve belli bir mesafeden sonra frekans aralığı düşüyordu. Aynı frekansı daha uzun metrajlarada uygulamak için Cat 5 kabloya göre daha sert ve iç direnci daha düşük bir kablo üretilmiştir. İlk başlarda Cat 5 standardında kabul edilen bu kablo Telekomünikasyon Endüstrisi Derneği tarafından Cat 5e olarak adlandırılmıştır. Genel özellikler Cat 5e 4 çift tellidir, renk çiftlerinin üzerinde herhangi bir şilt kaplı değildir. Temel iletkeni bakırdır,şeffaf bant kaplaması ilk üretilen Cat 5e'lerde yoktu daha sonra üretilen kablolarda polyester bant kullanılmıştır. Kablonun dış kaplaması yanmaz LS0H bileşeninden oluşmuştur. Cat5e kablo sonlandırma standartları Ağ donanımları Sinyal kabloları Ethernet kabloları
__label__tr Yolgeçen, Zonguldak ilinin Çaycuma ilçesine bağlı bir köydür. Tarihçe Köyün adı, 1928 yılı kayıtlarında Balkur olarak geçmektedir. Coğrafya Köy, Zonguldak il merkezine 53 km, Çaycuma ilçe merkezine 8 km uzaklıktadır. Nüfus Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Çaycuma belde ve köyleri
__label__tr Jerry Bronson Givens (3 Aralık 1952 - 13 Nisan 2020), 1982'den 1999'a kadar Virginia'da baş cellattı ve bu süre zarfında Briley Kardeşlerin ikisi de dahil olmak üzere 62 kişiyi idam etti. Givens, 13 Nisan 2020'de Richmond'daki bir hastanede COVID-19 komplikasyonlarından 67 yaşında öldü. Kaynakça 2020 yılında ölenler 1952 doğumlular Amerika Birleşik Devletleri'nde COVID-19 pandemisinden ölenler
__label__tr Yenice, Aydın ilinin Karacasu ilçesine bağlı bir mahalledir. Tarihçe Mahalle, 1905 yılından beri aynı adı taşımaktadır. 1 Mart 1957 tarihinde belediye statüsü alarak beldeye dönüştü. 2012 yılındaki yasa değişikliğinden sonra mahalle oldu. Nüfus 2013: 1192 2014: 1178 2015: 1110 2016: 1096 2017: 1022 2018: 1019 2019: 992 Kaynakça Karacasu'nun mahalleleri
__label__tr İngilizce Free On Board (FOB) terimi, tedarikçinin malzemeyi nakliye yapılacağı geminin güvertesine taşıyana kadar olan sorumluluğunu içerir. Fabrikadan liman gümrüğüne kadar olan taşıma masrafları ile liman gümrüğü ve liman masrafları tedarikçiye aittir. Malzeme gemi güvertesine taşındıktan sonraki sorumluluk ise müşteriye aittir. Deniz taşımacılığında kullanılan bir terim olup, petrol fiyatları ile ilgili olarak CIF ile birlikte en sık kullanılan terimdir. Bu teslim şeklinde taşıma bedelini kim ödüyorsa taşıyıcıyı o belirler. Yani taşıyıcı alıcı tarafından belirlenir. Hukuk belgeleri Denizcilik terimleri INCOTERMS
__label__tr Au-Kline sendromu (Okamoto sendromu), otosomal dominant yolla aktarılan kalıtsal bir sendromdur; böbrek, kalp ve yüz bulgularıyla öne çıkar. Dolikosefalik hastada, metopik sutur bölgesinde, skafosefali görünümü veren, birkemik tümseği vardır. Kraniyosinostoz nedenli mikrosefali görülür. Ense derisi kalındır. Yüz uzun, kulaklar olması gereken yerin biraz aşağısındadır; işitme sorunları vardır. Kaş kılları distalde seyrekleşir. Göz kapak açıklıkları uzun ve aşağı çekiktir; ptozis bulunabilir. Burun yayvandır. Ağız genellikle açıktır. Dil buruşuktur (skrotal dil). Damak aşırı çukur ya da yarıktır. Çok sayıda eksik diş saptanır (oligodonti). Hidronefroz ve üriner sistem infeksiyonları, konjenital kalp defektleri, psikomotor gelişme geriliği ile zeka geriliği bulguları önemlidir. Nöral tüp defektleri bulunabilir (spina bifida ve siringomyeli). Corpus callosum hipoplaziktir. Kas tonusu yetersizdir (hipotoni). İskelet sisteminde, toraks anomalileri, skolyoz, konjenital kalça çıkığı ve parmak anomalileri görülür. Meme uçları açıklığı aşırı düzeydedir, erkek çocuklarında testisler skrotuma inmemiş olabilir. Kaynakça Sendromlar Genetik hastalıklar
__label__tr NGC 3522, Yeni Genel Katalog'da yer alan bir galaksidir. Gökyüzünde Aslan takımyıldızı yönünde bulunur. E4 tipi bir eliptik galaksidir. Amerikan astronom Lewis A. Swift tarafından 1883 yılında 40,64 cm (16 inç) çaplı mercekli tip bir teleskopla keşfedilmiştir. Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar SEDS NGC3522 3522 PGC cisimleri
__label__tr Maruf, Sinop ilinin Boyabat ilçesine bağlı bir köydür. Tarihçe Köy, 1925 yılından beri aynı adı taşımaktadır. Coğrafya Köy, Sinop il merkezine 107 km, Boyabat ilçe merkezine 17 km uzaklıktadır. Nüfus Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Boyabat belde ve köyleri
__label__tr Nossa Senhora da Tourega Portekiz'de Évora belediyesine bağlı olan, 198,84 km2 yüzölçümüne sahip, 804 nüfuslu (2001) bir bucaktır (Portekizce: freguesia). Eski adı Nossa Senhora da Torega 'dır. Portekiz'in freguesiaları Évora
__label__tr Kurgulama, seçme ve bilgi iletmek için kullanılan yazılı, görsel, işitsel ve film veya medya hazırlama işlemidir. Düzenleme süreci, düzeltme, yoğunlaşmayı, organizasyon ve doğru, tutarlı, doğru ve eksiksiz iş üreten bir niyeti ile yapılan diğer birçok değişiklikler içerebilir. Düzenleme işlemi genellikle yazar ve iş gibi editör arasında bir işbirliği oluşturularak devam eden, işin kendisi için yazarın fikri ile başlar. Bu nedenle, düzenleme yaratıcı becerilerini, insan ilişkilerini ve yöntemler kesin bir set içerebilir. Gazetecilik İletişim
__label__tr Anssi Valtteri Jaakkola (d. 13 Mart 1987), kaleci olarak görev yapan Fin profesyonel futbolcudur. Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar 1987 doğumlular Yaşayan insanlar Kemi doğumlular Fin futbolcular Kaleci futbolcular ACN Siena 1904 futbolcuları SK Slavia Praha futbolcuları Kilmarnock FC futbolcuları Ajax Cape Town FC futbolcuları Reading FC futbolcuları Bristol Rovers FC futbolcuları Veikkausliiga futbolcuları Serie A futbolcuları Lega Pro futbolcuları 1. liga futbolcuları Scottish Professional Football League futbolcuları English Football League futbolcuları Finlandiya millî futbol takımı futbolcuları 2020 Avrupa Futbol Şampiyonası futbolcuları Fin gurbetçi futbolcular İtalya'daki gurbetçi futbolcular Çekya'daki gurbetçi futbolcular Birleşik Krallık'taki gurbetçi futbolcular Güney Afrika Cumhuriyeti'ndeki gurbetçi futbolcular İtalya'daki Fin gurbetçiler Birleşik Krallık'taki Fin gurbetçiler
__label__tr Didgori-3 (Gürcüce: დიდგორი-3), Gürcistan Savunma Bakanlığı'na bağlı "Delta" araştırma merkezi tarafından geliştirilen 6×6 MRAP tipi zırhlı personel taşıyıcıdır. Didgori-3 ilk olarak 2012'deki bir askeri geçit töreni sırasında sergilendi. Araç, adını Didgori Muharebesi'nden almıştır. Teknik özellikleri Didgori-3, öncülleri Didgori-1 ve Didgori-2 gibi gece/termal görüntüleme kameraları ve GPS navigasyon sistemi ile donatılmıştır. Kameralardan gelen bilgiler sürücü, komutan ve yolcular için tasarlanmış üç farklı ekranda gösterilir. Zırh Zırh, 7.62×54mmR AP mermi darbelerine, STANAG 2. seviyedeki mayın patlamalarına ve doğrudan atılan el bombası darbelerine karşı dayanıklıdır. Malzemenin bileşimi sınıflandırıldığı için daha fazla ayrıntı bilinmemektedir. Monokok çelik v-gövde, küçük silah ateşine, top mermisi şarapneline, anti-personel/tank mayınlarına ve el yapımı patlayıcılara karşı koruma sağlar. Kullanıcılar – 8+ yıldır Gürcistan Savunma Kuvvetleri tarafından kullanılmakta. Ayrıca bakınız Otokar Kobra Humvee Lazika Kaynakça Zırhlı personel taşıyıcılar Tekerlekli zırhlı personel taşıyıcılar
__label__tr Laponya bölgesi, kuzey İsveç'in Lapland ilinde; Gällivare Belediyesi, Arjeplog Belediyesi ve Jokkmokk Belediyesi sınırları içinde yer alan geniş dağlık bir yaban hayatı alanıdır. 1996 yılında UNESCO tarafından bir Dünya Mirası olarak ilan edildi. Galeri Kaynakça Norrbotten ili İsveç'teki Dünya Mirasları İsveç'teki millî parklar
__label__tr Cylk Cozart (d.01 Şubat 1957; Knoxville; Tennessee), Siyahi ve Çeroki kızılderelisi asıllı Amerikalı oyuncudur. Yarı Afrika kökenli yarı kızılderili olan oyuncu kariyerine NBA'de basketbolla başlamıştır. 1982'de oyunculuğa geçiş yaparak birçok film ve televizyon yapımında rol almıştır. Komplo Teorisi, Beyazlar Beceremez ve 16 Blok gibi başarılı iş getiren yapımlarda rol almıştır. Filmografi (seçme) School Daze (1988) Fire Birds (1990) Ricochet (1991) Chi non salta bianco è (1992) In the Line of Fire (1993) Love Affair (1994) L'eliminatore - Eraser (1996) Conspiracy Theory (1997) Three to Tango (1999) 16 Blocks (2006) Dış bağlantılar Çeroki asıllı Amerikalılar 1957 doğumlular Yaşayan insanlar Afrikalı Amerikalı erkek oyuncular
__label__tr Brittany Allen(d. 5 Şubat 1986) Kanadalı aktris ve besteci. İlk kayda değer rolü, 2009-2010 yılları arasında All My Children'da Marissa Chandler rolüyle oldu ve bu rolüyle 2011'de En İyi Genç Kadın Oyuncu dalında Daytime Emmy Ödülü aldı. Daha sonraki yıllarda, sürekli olarak televizyon dizilerinde ve Colin Minihan'ın filmlerinde rol almıştır. Kişisel Hayatı 2014 yılında yönettiği ve başrolünü oynadığı Extraterrestrial setinde tanıştığı Kanadalı yönetmen Colin Minihan ile çıkmaya başladı. Çift, bugüne kadar iki filmde birlikte rol almıştır. Filmografi Film Televizyon Ödüller ve adaylıklar Dış bağlantılar Kaynakça Yaşayan insanlar 1986 doğumlular Toronto doğumlu kadın oyuncular Emmy Ödülü sahipleri Kanadalı kadın dizi oyuncuları 20. yüzyılda Kanadalı kadın oyuncular 21. yüzyılda Kanadalı kadın oyuncular
__label__tr Rıfat Öçten (1913, Sivas, Türkiye - 1 Mart, 1970), Türk siyasetçidir. Ankara Üniversitesi Hukuk Fakültesi'ni bitirdi. Savcılık, Hâkimlik, Serbest Avukatlık, PTT Genel Müdürlüğü İdare Meclisi Üyeliği, IX., X. Dönem Sivas Milletvekilliği, Cumhuriyet Senatosu Sivas Üyeliği (15 Ekim 1961 - 1 Mart 1970) ile Ulaştırma Bakanlığı yaptı. Evli ve dört çocuk babasıydı. Kaynakça 1913 doğumlular 1970 yılında ölenler Ankara Üniversitesi Hukuk Fakültesinde öğrenim görenler TBMM 9. dönem Sivas milletvekilleri TBMM 10. dönem Sivas milletvekilleri TBMM Sivas Cumhuriyet Senatörleri Hukukçu Senatörler Sivas doğumlu siyasetçiler Resim aranan siyasetçiler TBMM Anayasa Komisyonu Demokrat Parti (1946) mensubu siyasetçiler 20. yüzyıl Türk siyasetçileri 20. yüzyıl Türk avukatları
__label__tr 3M Company, Amerika Birleşik Devletleri merkezli bir konglomerattır. Şirket, 13 Haziran 1902 tarihinde beş iş insanı tarafından bir madencilik girişimi olarak Amerika'nın Minnesota eyaletinde kurulmuştur. 3M, bantlar, tutkallar, aşındırıcılar, laminatlar, pasif yangın koruma, kişisel koruyucu ekipman, diş ve ortodontik ürünler, elektronik devre ve yazılımlar, tıbbi ürünler, araç bakım ürünleri ve optik filmler dahil olmak üzere 60.000'den fazla ürün üretmektedir. Şirketin merkezi Minnesota eyaletine bağlı Maplewood kentinde yer almaktadır. 3M, 65'i aşkın ülkede üretim operasyonları bulunan 29 uluslararası şirket ve 35 şirket laboratuvarıyla faaliyet göstermektedir. Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar 1902'de kurulan şirketler New York Borsası'ndaki şirketler Dow Jones Borsası endüstri endeksindeki şirketler Minnesota merkezli şirketler Amerika Birleşik Devletleri merkezli imalat şirketleri Nanoteknoloji şirketleri Ofis donanımı şirketleri Konglomeratlar Ulusal Teknoloji Madalyası sahipleri Amerika Birleşik Devletleri konglomera şirketleri
__label__tr Mehmet Varinli, (1915 (r. 1331), Kayseri - 23 Mart 1968, Ankara), Türk bürokrat. 1938 yılında Ankara Üniversitesi Siyasal Bilgiler Fakültesi'nden mezun oldu. Çankırı, Erzurum, Trabzon Maiyet memurluğu, Dağbaşı nahiye müdürlüğü, Tuzluca kaymakamlığı yaptı. 1954-1956 yılları arasında Isparta, 1956-1960 yılları arasında Amasya, 1960 yılında Çorum, 1962-1964 yılları arasında Sivas ve 1964-1965 yılları arasında ikinci kez Çorum valilikleri yapmıştır. İlk Çorum valiliği sırasında aynı zamanda belediye başkanlığına da vekalet etmiştir. Sivas valiliği sırasında aynı zamanda belediye başkanlığı yapmıştır. İkinci kere Çorum valisi iken Danıştay üyeliğine atanmıştır. Danıştay 4. daire üyesiyken 1968 yılında ölmüştür. Kaynakça 1915 doğumlular Kayseri doğumlular 1968 yılında ölenler Ankara'da ölenler Ankara Üniversitesi Siyasal Bilgiler Fakültesinde öğrenim görenler Türkiye Danıştay üyeleri Bilgi kutusu bulunmayan makam sahipleri
__label__tr Mahmut Bozdoğan, (1925, Kadirli, Osmaniye - 3 Ağustos 1999), Türk siyasetçi. Yaşamı Haruniye Köy Enstitüsü mezunudur. Yüksek Köy Enstitüsü II. sınıftan terktir. Köy Öğretmenliği, Millî Eğitim Bakanlığı Ortaöğretim Şube Müdür Muavinliği, Kadirli İlköğretim Müdürlüğü, Osmaniye İlköğretim Müfettişliği, Adana Millî Eğitim Müdür Yardımcılığı yapmıştır. TBMM II. (XIII) Dönem Adana Milletvekilidir. Evli ve 8 çocuk babasıdır. Kaynakça 1925 doğumlular Kadirli doğumlular Osmaniye doğumlu siyasetçiler 1999 yılında ölenler TBMM 13. dönem Adana milletvekilleri Resim aranan siyasetçiler Cumhuriyet Halk Partisi mensubu siyasetçiler 20. yüzyıl Türk siyasetçileri Türk öğretmenler
__label__tr Yaylabaşı, Mardin ilinin Artuklu ilçesine bağlı bir mahalledir. Tarihçe Mahallenin adı, 1526 yılı kayıtlarında Şatıh olarak geçmektedir. Daha önceleri Savur ilçesine bağlıyken, 24 Kasım 1955'te Mardin merkez ilçeye bağlandı. Artuklu ilçesinin kurulmasının ardından ise buraya bağlandı. Coğrafya Mardin il merkezine 34 km uzaklıktadır. Nüfus Kaynakça Artuklu'nun mahalleleri
__label__tr Krisia Marinova Todorova (Bulgarca: Крисия Тодорова, 1 Kasım 2004 - Razgrad) Bulgar şarkıcı. Krisya, Malta'da yapılacak 2014 Eurovision Çocuk Şarkı Yarışması'nda Bulgaristan'ı Hasan & İbrahim ikilisi ile birlikte "Planet of the Children" adlı şarkı ile temsil etmiştir. Yarışmada 2. olmuştur. Yaşamı Krisya, 1 Haziran 2004 tarihinde Varna'da doğdu fakat Razgrad şehrinde yaşamaktadır. Çok küçük yaşlarda şarkı söylemeye başlamıştır. Babası Marin Todorova ve Annesi Angelina Todorova'dır. İki kız kardeşi vardır, Tiffany Todorova (born 2001) ve Marina Todorova (2009). Krisya, 6 yaşından beri Bulgaristan'daki farklı müzik okullarına gitmiştir. şimdilerde Razgrad'da müzik bölümünden devam etmektedir. Kaynakça 2004 doğumlular Bulgar pop şarkıcıları Bulgar kadın şarkıcılar Bulgar çocuk şarkıcılar Bulgaristan'ın Eurovision Çocuk Şarkı Yarışması yarışmacıları 2014 Eurovision Çocuk Şarkı Yarışması yarışmacıları Yaşayan insanlar 21. yüzyıl kadın şarkıcıları
__label__tr Antrenör (Fransızca; entraîneur kelimesinden gelir), sporcunun başarısı için spor becerileri ve strateji ile gelişimini sağlayan kişi. Boks, futbol, basketbol, atletizm gibi branşlarda oyuncuları yapılacak müsabakalara ve turnuvalara hazırlayan kimsedir. Antrenmanlarda amatör veya profesyonel tüm sporcuların, zaman, mekan, donanım, teknik, taktik gibi değişkenleri de göz önüne alarak yeterli düzeye çıkarmakla yükümlüdür. Futbol antrenörü Takımın yönetiminden ve çeşitli ihtiyaçlarını karşılamaktan sorumlu kişilerdir. Teknik direktör, yardımcı antrenör, antrenörler, kaleci antrenörü, sağlık personeli, gerekli ise tercüman. Kaynakça Futbol terimleri
__label__tr Gliridae Sciuromorpha alttakımına bağlı bir hayvan familyasıdır. Kuyruğu ile birlikte boyu 30 cm'yi bulabilir. Ağaçcıldır ve sincaba benzer; ama sincap kadar çevik değildir. Meyveler, tohumlar bazen de böcekle beslenir. Ağaç kovuklarına yuva yapar. Meyve bahçelerine büyük zarar verir. Genellikle Avrupa, Afrika'nın bazı kesimleri, Asya ve Avrupa'da yaşayan türlerdir. Uzun kış uykusu periyotlarıyla da bilinirler. “Yediuyur” ismi ile de bilinirler. Taksonomi Gliridae familyasına bağlı altfamilyalar: Glirinae - Muirhead, 1819 Graphiurinae - Winge, 1887 Leithiinae - Lydekker, 1896 Konuyla ilgili yayınlar Dış bağlantılar Glirarium.org Kaynakça Sciuromorpha Lockhart Muirhead tarafından adlandırılmış taksonlar 1819'da tanımlanan taksonlar
__label__tr Erişte pilavı (Dane - i reştiyye) erişte ile yapılan pilav çeşididir. Yörelere göre iç malzemesi değişmektedir. Osmanlı mutfağında yapılmaktadır. Osmanlı Mutfağındaki Çeşitleri Kitâb-ı Me’kûlât'da Erişte olarak tarifi verilmiştir.Kitâbü't-Tabîh (Bağdâdî)(Muhammed bin Mahmûd Şirvânî çevirisinde) “terkib-i rişde” başlıklı tarifle aynıdır. Reştiyye Osmanlı mutfağında erişte, tulum peynir, tereyağı, ceviz, maydanoz, pul biber, tuz ile yapılan çeşididir. Türkiye'de Yörelere Göre Çeşitleri Bolu usulü keşli cevizli erişte Sivas yumurta eriştesi pilavı Kars erişte pilavı Niğde cevizli erişte Amasya erişteli pilav Van erişte pilavı Sivas kavurma eriştesi pilavı Ankara keşli makarna (erişte pilavı) Kocaeli cevizli keşli köy makarnası (erişte pilavı) Isparta ev makarnası (erişte pilavı) Kaynakça Türk mutfağındaki pilavlar Osmanlı mutfağındaki pilavlar Van mutfağı Kars mutfağı
__label__tr Olaylar İyon kent devletleri ittifakı ile I. Darius'un Akamenid imparatorluğu arasında Lade Deniz Muharebesi yapıldı. Roma'da pleblerin Kutsal Tepe'ye çıkması ile tarihin ilk grevi başlatıldı. Doğumlar Ölümler
__label__tr Hisar sınıfı Açık Deniz Karakol Gemisi, MİLGEM projesi kapsamında Türk Deniz Kuvvetleri için geliştirilen karakol gemisi sınıfıdır. Türk Deniz Kuvvetleri için 10 adet üretilmesi planlanmaktadır. Tasarım Hisar sınıfı karakol gemileri, Ada sınıfı korvetlerin tasarımı baz alınarak geliştirilmiştir. Benzer tonaj ve boya sahip olan bu gemiler farklı yerlerde, istihbarat, gözetleme, keşif, deniz haydutluğuyla mücadele, deniz kaynaklarının korunması, deniz güvenliğinin tesisi, doğal afetlerde insani yardım, arama ve kurtarma görevlerinde özellikle ekonomik ve etkin görev icra edebilecek şekilde tasarlanmıştır. Sınıftaki gemiler Kaynakça Genel Türk Deniz Kuvvetleri savaş gemileri MİLGEM Devriye botları 2020'ler gemileri
__label__tr Hamidiye Marşı, 1876'dan 1909'a kadar Osmanlı İmparatorluğu'nun padişah marşıydı. 1876'da Sultan II. Abdülhamid, Necip Paşa'dan Hamidiye Marşı'nı bestelemesini istedi. Bu aynı zamanda güfteye sahip ilk Osmanlı padişah marşıdır. Sözleri Kaynakça II. Abdülhamid
__label__tr Bu sayfa, motor sporlarında kullanılan kavram ve terimleri listeler. K Kaçış alanı Yarışçıların pisti acil durumlarda terk edebilmelerini sağlayan bölüm. S Sıralama turları Yarışçıların yarışa başlama sıralarını belirlemeye yarayan süreç. Ayrıca bakınız Motor sporları
__label__tr Bu madde Veracruz eyaleti hakkındadır. Aynı isimli şehir için Veracruz (şehir) maddesine bakınız. Veracruz, Meksika'yı oluşturan 31 eyâletten birisidir. Ülkenin merkez doğu bölgesinde yer alır. 17°10' ve 22°38' kuzey enlemleri ile 93°55' ve 98°38' batı boylamları arasında bulunur. Yüzölçümü 72.815 km²'dir. 2005 sayımına göre nüfusu 7.110.214 kişidir. Dış bağlantılar Veracruz State government Veracruz Photos and History Veracruz Gallery museum of the city Facultad de Pedagogia Bir Gezginin Meksika Hatiralari-Veracruz
__label__tr Arianne Phillips (d. 26 Nisan 1963), Amerikalı bir kostüm tasarımcısı. Phillips ayrıca Madonna'nın stilistidir ve şarkıcının son dört turnesini tasarlamıştır. İki kez Oscar adaylığı elde etmiştir. Çalışmaları W.E. (2012) Knight and Day (2010) A Single Man (2009) 3:10 Treni (2007) Walk the Line (2005) Identity (2003) Swept Away (2002) One Hour Photo (2002) Hedwig and the Angry Inch (2001) Girl, Interrupted (1999) The Mod Squad (1999) The Replacement Killers (1998) Best Men (1997) Going All the Way (1997) The People vs. Larry Flynt (1996) Duke of Groove (1996) (TV) Tank Girl (1995) The Last Supper The Crow (1994) Attack of the 50 Ft. Woman (1993) The Last Supper (1993) Pyrates (1991) Bail Jumper (1990) Kaynakça Yaşayan insanlar 1963 doğumlular Amerikalı tasarımcılar New York doğumlular
__label__tr Ondokuz Mayıs Üniversitesi Gözlemevi, Ondokuz Mayıs Üniversitesi Havacılık ve Uzay Bilimleri Fakültesi tarafından işletilen, yer tabanlı bir astronomik gözlemevidir. 1 Haziran 2006'da kurulan gözlemevi Samsun'un 14 km kuzeybatısındaki üniversite kampüsünde yer almaktadır. Kaynakça Gözlemevi Türkiye'deki gözlemevleri Samsun ilindeki yapılar 2006'da kurulan oluşumlar
__label__tr Frank Cullotta (14 Aralık 1938 - 20 Ağustos 2020), Amerikalı suç örgütü üyesi, tur rehberi ve yazar. Chicago Outfit mafya örgütlenmesine bağlıydı. Hayatı Cullotta 14 Aralık 1938'de Chicago, Illinois'de doğdu. Arkadaşı olan diğer suç örgütü üyesi Tony Spilotro ile birlikte Las Vegas'ta yer alan "Hole in the Wall Gang" adlı suç örgütünde faaliyet gösterdiler. 1982'de hapise girdikten sonra Amerikan Hükümeti'ne suç örgütleri aleyhinde şahitlik yaptıktan sonra girdiği tanık koruma programı ile serbest bırakıldı. Cullotta suç örgütünden ayrıldıktan sonra yazarlık ve tur rehberliği yaptı ayrıca Hollywood yapımı suç içerikli Casino gibi polisiye filmlerde danışman olarak çalıştı. Ölümü Cullotta diyabet hastalığı ile seyreden COVID-19 nedeniyle 20 Ağustos 2020'de Las Vegas'da 81 yaşında öldü. Kaynakça Chicago Outfit İtalyan asıllı Amerikalılar Amerikalı anı yazarları 1938 doğumlular 2020 yılında ölenler Amerika Birleşik Devletleri'nde COVID-19 pandemisinden ölenler Diyabetten ölenler Amerikalı tutuklular ve hükümlüler Las Vegas'ta ölenler
__label__tr Mercy For Animals (MFA) (Türkçe, Hayvanlar için Merhamet), 1999 yılında Milo Runkle tarafından kurulmuş, kâr amacı gütmeyen uluslararası bir hayvan koruma kuruluşudur. MFA'nın misyonu, "çiftlik hayvanlarına yönelik zulmü önlemek ve merhametli gıda seçimlerini ve politikalarını teşvik etmektir." MFA, fabrikalar çiftlikler ve mezbahalar hakkında birçoğu hayvanlara zulüm sebebiyle mahkumiyetlerle, kurumsal hayvan refahı politikalarındaki değişikliklerle sonuçlanan ve medyada yer alan 65'ten fazla soruşturma yürütmüştür. Örgüt, Nestlé, Perdue, ve Walmart, dahil olmak üzere dünyanın en büyük gıda şirketlerinin çoğuna hayvan refahı politikalarını benimseme konusunda rehberlik etmiştir. MFA ayrıca sosyal medya, videolar, yazılar ve çevrimiçi kaynaklar aracılığıyla vegan beslenmeyi teşvik eder. Ayrıca bakınız Hayvan hakları gruplarının listesi Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Resmî site Hayvanlara Merhamet Youtube kanalı 1999'da kurulan kuruluşlar Hayvan hakları kuruluşları
__label__tr Çavuşköy, Ağrı ilinin Patnos ilçesine bağlı bir köydür. Tarihçe Köy, 1928 yılından beri aynı adı taşımaktadır. Coğrafya Köy, Ağrı il merkezine 91 km, Patnos ilçe merkezine 11 km uzaklıktadır. Nüfus Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Patnos belde ve köyleri
__label__tr Erentepe, Antalya ilinin Kumluca ilçesine bağlı bir mahalledir. Tarihçe Mahallenin adı, 1926 yılı kayıtlarında Gerçin olarak geçmektedir. Coğrafya Antalya il merkezine 97 km, Kumluca ilçe merkezine 13 km uzaklıktadır. Nüfus Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Kumluca'nın mahalleleri
__label__tr Seringöze, Erzincan ilinin Kemah ilçesine bağlı bir köydür. Tarihçe Köyün eski adı 1928 yılına ait kaynakta Şökte / Şötke olarak geçmektedir. Coğrafya Köy, Erzincan iline 87 km, Kemah ilçesine 37 km mesafededir. Nüfus Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Kemah belde ve köyleri
__label__tr Hiroshi Sato (d. 7 Mart 1972), Japon eski futbolcudur. Profesyonel kariyerine 1992 yılında Yokohama Flügels kulübünde başladı. Daha sonra sırasıyla Sanfrecce Hiroshima, Nagoya Grampus Eight, Yokohama F. Marinos kulüplerinde oynadı. Kaynakça 1972 doğumlular Yaşayan insanlar Kaleci futbolcular Yokohama F. Marinos futbolcuları Kanagawa (prefektörlük) doğumlu futbolcular Yokohama Flügels futbolcuları Sanfrecce Hiroshima futbolcuları Nagoya Grampus futbolcuları J1 League futbolcuları
__label__tr Habur Çayı (Büyük Habur, Batı Circip), Fırat Nehri'nin kollarından biri. Karaca Dağ'dan başlayan birkaç geçici akarsuyun Ceylanpınar'da birleşmesiyle oluşur. Sularının çoğunluğunu, asıl kaynağını olan Suriye'deki Resulayn'deki karstik kaynaklardan alır.. Suriye'de Abdulaziz Dağı yakınlarından geçer Çağçağa Suyu ile birleşerek Fırat Nehri'ne dökülür. Çay Busayra kenti yakınlarında Fırat'a katılır. Nehir havzasına 200-400 mm/yıl yağış düşer. Yağışın yetersiz olduğu havzasında tarım açısından önemlidir. Suriye'de Habur Çayı merkezli barajlar ve kanallar yapılarak sulama sistemi kurulmuştur. Suriye Habur üzerine Taaf, Saab ve Sohuei barajlarını inşa etmiştir. Kaynakça Türkiye'deki akarsular Suriye'deki nehirler Fırat Şanlıurfa ilindeki yeryüzü şekilleri
__label__tr ALPHA (alfa-etil-3,4-metilendioksibenzilamin), daha az bilinen bir psikedelik madde ve ikame edilmiş bir benzilamindir. Aynı zamanda 3,4-metilendioksiamfetaminin (MDA) benzilamin analoğudur. ALPHA ilk olarak Alexander Shulgin tarafından sentezlenmiştir. MDA sayfasında PİHKAL adlı kitabında eşik doz 10 mg olarak listelenmiştir. Hafif eşik dozlarda (yaklaşık 10 mg), vücutta biraz karıncalanma ile birlikte gözler kapalıyken görülen "rüyalar", daha yüksek dozlarda (140 mg'a kadar) hoş ve olumlu bir his yarattığı rapor edilmiştir. Bu bileşik herhangi bir dozda anoretik değildir. Yaklaşık 3 saat sürer. ALPHA'nın farmakolojik özellikleri, metabolizması ve toksisitesi hakkında çok az veri mevcuttur. Kaynakça Psikedelik ilaçlar
__label__tr Michel Naim Avn (, (d. 30 Eylül 1933), Lübnanlı asker ve siyasetçi. Lübnan'ın 13. Cumhurbaşkanıdır. Lübnan parlamentosunun 46. seçim oturumunda 31 Ekim 2016 tarihinde cumhurbaşkanı seçildi. 30 Ekim 2022'de görev süresi sona erdi. 1984 yılında Lübnan Ordusuna General olarak atandı. 22 Eylül 1988 - 13 Ekim 1990 tarihlerinde, Lübnan Cumhurbaşkanı olan Emin Cemayil tarafından Başbakan olarak atandı. Kaynakça |- |- |- |- 1933 doğumlular Lübnan başbakanları Lübnan cumhurbaşkanları Yaşayan insanlar Enformasyon bakanları Lübnan içişleri bakanları Lübnan dışişleri bakanları Lübnan savunma bakanları
__label__tr Puget Boğazı (), Amerika Birleşik Devletleri'nin Washington eyaletinin kuzeybatı sahili boyunca, Pasifik Okyanusu'nun bir girişi ve Salish Denizi'nin bir parçası olan bir boğazdır. 161 km uzunluğunda olup Juan de Fuca Boğazı yoluyla Pasifik Okyanusu'na bir ana ve iki küçük bağlantı bulunan, birbirine bağlı deniz suyu ve havzalarından oluşan bir haliç sistemidir. Ayrıca bakınız Türk Boğazları Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar University of Washington Libraries Digital Collections – Oliver S. Van Olinda Photographs A collection of 420 photographs depicting life on Vashon Island, Whidbey Island, Seattle, and other communities of Washington State's Puget Sound from the 1880s through the 1930s.
__label__tr Edmar Lacerda da Silva (d. 19 Nisan 1982) Brezilyalı futbolcudur. Kıbrıs 1. Lig takımlarından AEL'da forma giymektedir. Dış bağlantılar zerozero.pt Player Statistics 1982 doğumlular Brezilyalı futbolcular Yaşayan insanlar Brezilyalı gurbetçi futbolcular Doksa THOİ Katokopias futbolcuları ALKİ Larnakas futbolcuları EN Paralimniu futbolcuları Kıbrıs Cumhuriyeti'ndeki Brezilyalı gurbetçiler Kıbrıs Cumhuriyeti'ndeki gurbetçi futbolcular İspanya'daki gurbetçi futbolcular AEL (Kıbrıs Cumhuriyeti) futbolcuları Resim aranan futbolcular Orta saha futbolcuları A' Katigorias futbolcuları
__label__tr Hans Waldmann (d. 1435, Blickensdorf, Zug Kantonu, İsviçre – ö. 6 Nisan 1489, Zürih) İsviçreli ordu komutanı ve Zürih valisi. 1483 yılında Zürih valisi olmuştur. Zürih'te Fraumünster Kilisesi önünde heykeli bulunmaktadır. 1435 doğumlular 1489 yılında ölenler
__label__tr Aşk Sakızı, Hepsi'nin 2. albümünden ikinci şarkıdır. Hepsi 2 albümünden klip çekilen şarkılardan biridir. Tarih Hepsi, video çekmek için sadece 4 müzik seçmiştir. Bunlar; Saklambaç, Mum, İki Kelime ve Aşk Sakızı'dır. Çoğunlukla oy alan şarkı Aşk Sakızı olduğu için klip Aşk Sakızı'na çekilmiştir. Listeleri Türkiye #1 Kaynakça Hepsi şarkıları Türkçe şarkılar
__label__tr Dedepınar, Çorum ilinin Alaca ilçesine bağlı bir köydür. Tarihçe Köyün adı, 1925 yılı kayıtlarında Veled, 1980 yılı kayıtlarında ise Erenköy olarak geçmektedir. Coğrafya Köy, Çorum il merkezine 57 km, Alaca ilçe merkezine 7 km uzaklıktadır. Nüfus Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Alaca belde ve köyleri
__label__tr Baymak, (Rusça: Баймак, Başkurtça: Baymak ) Başkurdistan'ın bir şehridir. 17 463 nüfusa sahiptir.. 1743 yılında kuruldu. Baymak ilçe'ın başkenti ve bir şehridir. Nüfus Başkurtlar-%71,6%, Ruslar, Tatarlar. Kaynakça Başkurdistan'daki şehirler
__label__tr 2022 UEFA Konferans Ligi Finali, 2021-22 UEFA Konferans Ligi kazananını belirlemek amacıyla 25 Mayıs 2022 tarihinde Arnavutluk'un Tiran şehrindeki Air Albania Stadyumunda oynanan organizasyonun ilk finalidir. Finale giden yol Not: Skor tablosunda finalistler ilk sırada yer almaktadır. (E: ev; D: deplasman). Detaylar İstatistikler Ayrıca bakınız 2021-22 UEFA Konferans Ligi 2022 UEFA Şampiyonlar Ligi Finali 2022 UEFA Avrupa Ligi Finali Kaynakça UEFA Avrupa Konferans Ligi finalleri Final UEFA Avrupa Konferans Ligi Finali AS Roma maçları Feyenoord maçları
__label__tr Celtis julianae, Cannabaceae familyasından bir çitlembik türüdür. Oldukça gevşek, şemsiye şeklinde taçlı, hızlı büyüyen, büyük bir ağaçtır. Uzun, çıkıntılı ve sarkık ilk yıl dalları, ağaca zarif bir görünüm kazandırır. Dallar koyu kahverengidir ve daha sonra griye döner. Yaprakların şekli ovalden eliptik veya ters yumurta şekline kadar değişir. Yaprağın alt tarafında, bazen sadece damarlarda olmak üzere sarı ila turuncu-sarı tüyler bulunur. Göze çarpmayan çiçekleri mordan turuncuya, yuvarlak eriksi meyve izler. Sıcak yazları tercih eder. İyi drene edilmiş toprağı tercih eder. Kuraklık ve hava kirliliğine tolerans gösterebilir. Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar julianae
__label__tr Pıdırah veya Butrahtı Belediyesi (Hakas Türkçesi: Пыдырах аал чӧбi — Pıdırah aal çöbi) — Hakas Cumhuriyeti'nde Tas tıp aymağına bağlı kırsal yerleşim durumunda bir belediye idari birimidir. İdari merkez Pıdırah köyüdür. Pıdırah köyü ile birlikte Haragay ve Çılannığ köyü de belediye sınırları içindedir. Söz tanımı Hakasça'da ilçe karşılığı olarak aymah (aymak) sözü kullanılır. Kırsal yönetim belediyelerine aal çöbi denir. Rusçaya Taştıp şeklinde geçen Türkçe sözün Hakasçası Tas tıp olarak söylenir. Anlamı taş dip demektir. Bağlı köyler İdari merkez Pıdırah köyüdür. Pıdırah köyü ile birlikte Haragay ve Çılannığ köyü de belediye sınırları içindedir. Nüfus Toplam Nüfusu 2018 yılı — 647 kişi. Yıllara göre kişi sayısı: Etnik yapı Etnik terkibi Hakas Türkleri oluşturur. Eğitim Belediyede bir tane ortaokul vardır. Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Butrahtı Selsovyet Kırsal Yerleşim Yönetimi
__label__tr Orhaniye, Ankara ilinin Kahramankazan ilçesine bağlı bir mahalledir. 19.Dönem Ankara Milletvekili Hamdi Eriş Orhaniyelidir. Tarihçe Köyün ismi Cumhuriyetin ilk yıllarında Orhaniye olarak değiştirilinceye kadar Minaris'tir. Rivayete göre köy Minaris ismini, Fethiye (Girindos) ve Örencik(Estanos) köylerinde olduğu gibi bir kralın üç oğlundan biri olan Minarus'tan almış ve Orhaniye olarak değiştirilinceye kadar Minaris olarak söylenegelmiştir. Osmanlı Döneminde köyde gayrımüslim azınlıkta yaşamaktaydı fakat 1.Cihan Harbinden sonra köyde azınlık nüfus kalmamıştır. Coğrafya İlçeye uzaklığı 15 km. Rakım 1000 m. Kahramankazan'ın mahalleleri
__label__tr NGC 6278, Yeni Genel Katalog'da yer alan bir galaksidir. Gökyüzünde Herkül takımyıldızı yönünde bulunur. S0 tipi bir merceksi galaksidir. İngiliz astronom William Herschel tarafından 1784 yılında 47,5 cm (18,7 inç) çaplı aynalı tip bir teleskopla keşfedilmiştir. Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar SEDS NGC6278 6278 PGC cisimleri
__label__tr László Branikovits (d. 18 Aralık 1949, Budapeşte - ö. 16 Ekim 2020, Budapeşte, Macaristan), Macar profesyonel futbolcudur. Yaşamı ve kariyeri Branikovits 18 Aralık 1949'da Budapeşte, Macaristan'da doğdu. Münih'te düzenlenen 1972 Yaz Olimpiyatları'nda erkekler futbol turnuvasında ikinci olarak gümüş madalya alan Macaristan Milli Futbol Takımı kadrosunda yer aldı. Ölümü Branikovits 16 Ekim 2020'de doğum yeri Budapeşte, Macaristan'da 70 yaşında öldü. Kaynakça 1949 doğumlular 2020 yılında ölenler Macar futbolcular 1972 Yaz Olimpiyatları futbolcuları Budapeşte doğumlu futbolcular Macaristan millî futbol takımı futbolcuları 1972 Yaz Olimpiyatları'nda madalya kazananlar Macar Olimpiyat futbolcuları Gümüş Olimpiyat madalyalı futbolcular Gümüş Olimpiyat madalyalı Macar sporcular
__label__tr Trodos Bölgesi'ndeki Boyalı Kiliseler, Orta Kıbrıs'ın Trodos Dağları'nda yer alan UNESCO Dünya Mirası Alanıdır. Alan, Bizans ve Bizans-öncesi duvar resimleri ile zengince dekore edilmiş on adet Bizans kilisesi ve manastırı içermektedir: Ayios Nikolaos tis Steyis (Saint Nicholas of the Roof), Kakopetria'da Ayios Ionannis Lampadistis (Saint John Lampadistis), Kalopanagiotis'te Panayia (Meryem Ana Kilisesi) Phorbiotissa (veya Asinu), Nikitari'de Panayia tou Arakos, Lagoudera'da Panagia tou Mutulla, Moutoullas'ta Başmelek Mikail Kilisesi, Pedhoulas'da Timios Stavros (Kutsal Haç Kilisesi), Pelendri'de Panagia Podhithou (Bakire Podithou Kilisesi), Galata'da Stavros Ayiasmati (Ayiasmati'nin Kutsal Haç Kilisesi), Platonistasa'da Metamorfoz tou Sotiros (Kurtarıcının Dönüşümü), Palaichori' Başlangıçta UNESCO tarafından bu kiliselerin dokuzu 1985 yılında, Palaichori'deki kilise ise 2001 yılında Dünya Mirasları listesine eklendi. Ayrıca bakınız Kıbrıs'taki duvar resimli kiliseler listesi Kaynakça
__label__tr Kryptos, CIA'nin ABD'deki merkezinin bahçesinde yapılmış, üzerinde şifreli yüzlerce harf bulunduran kitabedir. 1989 yılında o zamanki CIA başkanı olan William Webster’ın talimatıyla CIA şifrecisi Ed Scheidt ve heykeltıraş Jim Sanborn tarafından yapılmıştır. 17 yıldır şifrenin ancak bir kısmı çözülebilmiştir, özellikle Dan Brown'ın Da Vinci Şifresi kitabından sonra kriptologların bir numaralı uğraşısı haline gelmiştir. Kriptoloji tarihi Heykeller Virginia'daki yapılar Virginia'da kültür Amerika Birleşik Devletleri'nde sanat Central Intelligence Agency Bulmacalar 1990'da eserler
__label__tr 2015-16 UEFA Gençlik Ligi, UEFA tarafından düzenlenen ve Avrupa genç takım düzeyinde futbol müsabakası olan UEFA Gençlik Ligi'nin üçüncü sezonudur. İki yıllık bir deneme süresinin ardından UEFA Gençlik Ligi, bu sezondan itibaren kalıcı bir UEFA müsabakası haline gelmiş ve turnuvada yer alan takım sayısı 32'den 64'e çıkarılmıştır. Finalde Paris Saint-Germain'i 2-1 yenen Chelsea, ikinci kez kupanın sahibi olmuştur. Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar 2015-16 UEFA Gençlik Ligi 2015'te Avrupa'da futbol 2016'da Avrupa'da futbol 2015-16
__label__tr Nokia 301 Nisan 2013'te Nokia tarafından piyasaya sürülen cep telefonudur. Seri 40 sistemlidir. Asha isminde olmamasına rağmen, Nokia Asha serisi'ne mensuptur. Nokia 301, geleneksel alfanümerik tuş takımıyla birlikte 2,4 inç ekrana sahiptir. Bir ton düzenleme ve paylaşım seçeneği sunan 3.2 megapiksel kamera bulunuyor. Facebook, Twitter ve WhatsApp gibi uygulamalar ile donatıltı. Nokia 301 renklidir - mavi, sarı, macenta, siyah ve beyaz renklerde bulunuyor. Üstte bir 3,5 mm kulaklık jakı ve microUSB portu, sol tarafta ise bir microSD kart yuvası var. İnternet için Nokia Xpress tarayıcısı, Facebook, Twitter ve YouTube gibi sık kullanılanlara hızlı bağlantılar sunuyor. Nokia 301 Dual SIM Symbian'ı çalıştırıyor ve 1200mAh çıkarılabilir bir batarya ile çalışıyor. 114.00 x 50.00 x 12.50 ölçü ve 102.00 gram ağırlığındadır. Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Nokia 301 Nokia cep telefonları Seri 40 sistemli cihazlar 2013 tanıtımları
__label__tr NGC 7272, Yeni Genel Katalog'da yer alan bir galaksidir. Gökyüzünde Kanatlıat takımyıldızı yönünde bulunur. SBa tipi bir çubuklu sarmal galaksidir. Alman astronom Albert Marth tarafından 1864 yılında 121,92 cm (48 inç) çaplı aynalı tip bir teleskopla keşfedilmiştir. Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar SEDS NGC7272 7272 PGC cisimleri
__label__tr Sehend Dağı (Farsça: سهند, Azerice: Səhənd), İran'ın kuzeybatısında, Doğu Azerbaycan Eyaleti'nde muazzam bir stratovolkandır. Sehend Dağı, 3.707 m. yüksekliği ile İran'ın Doğu Azerbaycan Eyaleti'nin en yüksek dağıdır. Sahand dağları Tebriz'in güneyinde yer alır ve içlerinde en yüksek tepe 3,750 m ile Jam Dağıdır. 3,000 m'nin üzerinde yaklaşık 17 tane tepe sayılabilir. Çok çeşitlilik barındıran flora ve faunasıyla Sahand dağları İran'da dağların gelini diye bilinir. Aynı zamanda Sahand 1988 ABD deniz kuvvetlerince Peygamber Devesi Operasyonu'nda batırılan İran'ın Saam sınıfı fırkateynin adıdır. Çeşitli flora ve fauna varlığı nedeniyle İran dağları arasında farklı bir yere sahiptir. Dağda bir kış sporları kompleksi kurulmuştur. Bu komplekste kış sporlarının dışında çeşitli etkinlikler de yapılmaktadır. Ayrıca bakınız Sehend Teknoloji Üniversitesi Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Global Volcanism Program İran'daki dağlar Stratovolkanlar Tebriz Üçbinlikler
__label__tr Marden-Walker sendromu, otosomal dominant yolla aktarılan kalıtsal bir sendromdur. Genel bir gelişme geriliği saptanır. Mikrosefali ve hipertelorizm belirgindir, boyun kısadır. Göz bulguları arasında mikroftalmi, göz kapaklarının yapışıklığı, strabismus ve ptozis dikkat çekicidir. Kulaklar aşağıda yerleşmiştir. Yüz kasları durgunluğu (akinezi) saptanır. Filtrum uzun, ağız açıklığı küçüktür. Altçene küçüktür (mikrognati). Damak yarığı saptanır. Vücuttaki kas kitlesi az, tendon refleksleri yetersizdir. Hipotoni vardır. Eklemlerde kontraktürler oluşur. Değişen düzeylerde amburluk (kifoskolyoz) ve uzun parmaklar (araknodaktili) görülür. Konjenital kalp anomalilerinin yanı sıra kalbin sağda yer almasına (dekstrokardi) ve ürogenital sistem anomalilerine rastlanabilir. Beyin anomalileri ve epilepsi atakları gözlenir. Tabloya, Zollinger-Ellison sendromu bulguları da eklenebilmektedir. Kaynakça Sendromlar Kardiyoloji Kas iskelet hastalıkları
__label__tr Seo Hye-lin (d. 23 Ağustos 1993) daha çok Hyelin adıyla bilinen Güney Koreli şarkıcı. Biografi Hye-lin 23 Ağustos 1993 tarihinde Gwangju, Güney Kore'de doğdu. Kariyer 2011 yılında Superstar K3 seçmelerine katıldı. Nisan 2012'de, AB Entertainment'in çıkaracağı EXID grubunun üç orijinal üyesi Yuji, Dami ve Haeryeong ile yer aldı. Hyerin'in gruptan ayrılmasıyla yerine Solji geldi. Diskografi EXID Filmografi Varyete show Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Yaşayan insanlar 1993 doğumlular Güney Koreli kadın şarkıcılar Güney Kore doğumlular EXID üyeleri K-pop sanatçıları Güney Koreli kadın idoller Güney Koreli rhythm and blues şarkıcıları Güney Koreli kadınlar Güney Koreli dans müzisyenleri Korece şarkı söyleyen şarkıcılar King of Mask Singer yarışmacıları Superstar K yarışmacıları
__label__tr Çamlıca, Mersin ilinin Silifke ilçesine bağlı bir mahalledir. Tarihçe Çamlıca; idari bölüm olarak daha önceleri köy iken, 2012 yılındaki yasa değişikliğinden sonra mahalle olmuştur. Nüfus Kaynakça Silifke'nin mahalleleri Evrifaessa Bot tarafından oluşturulan mahalle maddeleri
__label__tr Big Bend Ulusal Parkı Amerika Birleşik Devletleri Teksas eyaletininn güneyinde ABD-Meksika uluslararası sınırı olan Rio Grande Nehri'nin ABD kısmı ile Chihuahuan Çölü'ne bulunan ve El Paso şehri yakınlarında olan 3.242 km² yüzölçümünü kapsayan, ABD Ulusal Park Hizmeti tarafından idare edilen bir millî park'tır. Resimler Ayrıca bakınız ABD'deki ulusal parklar listesi Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Ulusal Park Hizmeti: Big Bend Ulusal Parkı Jameson, John R. (1996) The Story of Big Bend National Park. University of Texas Press.
__label__tr Salland, Hollanda'da Overijssel Eyaleti'nin kuzey ve batısını kaplayan tarihi bir bölgedir. Büyük ihtimalle ismini bu bölgede yaşamış olan Sallian Frankları'ndan almaktadır. Tarih Salland'ın tarihi bölgenin Utrecht Psikoposluğu tarafından yönetildiği Orta Çağ'a kadar gitmektedir. Psikoposluk bu toprakları Kutsal Roma İmparatoru V. Karl'a satınca, Overijssel Eyaleti'nin kurucu bölgelerinden biri oldu. Coğrafya Salland batıda ve güneyde Gelderland, kuzeyde Drenthe, doğuda Aşağı Saksonya ile komşudur. Eyaletin 3 önemli kenti olan Deventer, başkent Zwolle ve Kampen bu bölgededir. Ancak büyük şehirlerde yaşayanlar kendilerini bölge ile özdeşleştirmediklerinden, bölgenin başkenti Raalte olarak kabul edilmektedir. Bölgenin büyük bölümü deniz sevisyesi altında kalan topraklardan oluşur. Bu topraklar bölgede sıkça rastlanan dere ve ırmakların getirdiği alüvyon nedeniyle oldukça verimlidir.
__label__tr Kuzucubelen Kalesi, Türkiye'nin Mersin ilinin Mezitli ilçesinin Kuzucubelen köyünde, günümüzde harap bir hâlde bulunan eski bir gözetleme kulesidir. Bölge halkı tarafından Taş Kale olarak adlandırılır. Dış kısmından yaklaşık 7,7 m × 6,1 m ölçülerindeki yaklaşık 47 m2 alana sahip dikdörtgen planlı, yükseltilmiş bir kaya levhanın kenarına yakın konumlanan iki katlı kule, Arslanköy ile Fındıkpınarı'ndan kıyı şeridine uzanan kuzey-güney doğrultusundaki yolun güvenliğini sağlıyordu. Kulenin duvar kalınlığı 0,9-1,8 m arasında değişirken ikinci kattaki duvarların kalınlığı, birinci katın neredeyse iki katıdır. Yüksekliği yaklaşık 6 m olan kule, batı cephesindeki çöken bir kısım dışında özgün yüksekliğini korumaktadır. Kulede, okçular için mazgal ya da benzeri açıklıklar bulunur. Alt katın bir sarnıç olarak kullanıldığı tahmin edilir. Kaynakça Genel Özel Mersin'deki kaleler Türkiye'deki harap kaleler Mezitli'deki yapılar
__label__tr Olaylar 6 Nisan - Pertevniyal Lisesi, Mahmudiye Rüştiyesi adı altında eğitim-öğretime başladı. 23 Aralık - Vefa Lisesinde eğitime başlandı. Tarihi bilinmeyenler Dünya futbol tarihinin ilk resmi maçı İngiltere - İskoçya arasında oynandı. İnsanlığın günümüze kalan en eski edebi eseri olan Gılgamış Destanı arkeolojik bir kazıda ortaya çıkarıldı Mısır'da, Thebes yıkıntılarında Ebers Papirüsü bulundu. Türkiye'de ilk defa Türkçe eğitim veren lise olan Vefa Lisesi kuruldu. Kasım - İlk Türk romanı Şemseddin Sami'nin Taaşşuk-ı Talat ve Fitnat'ı Hadîka gazetesinde tefrika edilmeye başlandı. Doğumlar 22 Nisan - Henning Berger, İsveçli yazar (ö. 1924) 6 Mayıs - Ahmet Cemal Paşa, Osmanlı asker ve siyaset adamı (ö. 1922). 15 Temmuz - Arşak Çobanyan, Osmanlı Ermenisi şair, yazar, dilbilimci ve çevirmen (ö. 9 Haziran 1954) Hattat Aziz Efendi, Türk hattat (ö. 1934). Ölümler
__label__tr Disiplinlerarasılık, iki ya da daha fazla akademik disiplinin bir akitivitede birleştirilmesine denir. Örnek olarak araştırma projeleri verilebilir. Disiplin sınırlarının dışına çıkarak, bağdaştırıcı düşünerek, bir yenilik yaratma çabasını ortaya koyar. Akademi Bilgi Meslekler Pedagoji
__label__tr Yalçınkaya, Şanlıurfa ilinin Ceylanpınar ilçesine bağlı bir mahalledir. Coğrafya Şanlıurfa il merkezine uzaklığı 136 km, Ceylanpınar ilçe merkezine 26 km uzaklıktadır. Nüfus Dış bağlantılar YerelNet Ceylanpınar'ın mahalleleri
__label__tr 2016 Gambiya devlet başkanlığı seçimi, Gambiya'da 1 Aralık 2016 tarihinde gerçekleştirilen devlet başkanlığı seçimidir. Seçimler ülkenin Birleşik Krallık'tan bağımsızlığını elde ettiği 1965 yılında bu yana kayıtlı seçmenin oylarının bir güç olarak devlet başkanın belirlendiği ilk seçimler olarak ön plana çıktığı ifade edilmiştir. Söz konusu tarihte üç adaylı gerçekleştirilen seçimlerde, ülkeyi 22 yıldır yöneten mevcut devlet başkanı Yahya Jammeh, muhalefet partilerinin ortak adayı olarak seçimlere katılan Adama Barrow'a karşı yenilmiştir. Bu seçimlerde oyların %43,3'ünü elde eden Barrow, ülkenin üçüncü devlet başkanı olarak Ocak 2017 itibarıyla makama çıkmaya hak kazanmıştır. Mevcut devlet başkanı Jammeh yaptığı ilk açıklamada sonuçları kabul ettiğini ifade etmiş olsa da daha sonra yaptığı ikinci bir açıklamada seçim sonuçlarını yaşanan usulsüzlükler nedeniyle tanımadığını ifade ederek yeni seçimlerin yapılması gerektiğini bildirmiştir. Sonuçlar Kaynakça Gambiya'da seçimler devlet başkanlığı seçimi Gambiya devlet başkanlığı seçimi
__label__tr 18 Mart Çan Termik Santrali, Çanakkale, Çan ilçesinde Kulfa ve Yaya köyleri arasındaki 1600 dönümlük arazi üzerine kurulmuş termik santraldir. Santral Çanakkale, Çan ilçesinde Kulfa ve Yaya köyleri arasındaki 1600 dönümlük arazi üzerine kurulmuştur. Çanakkale-Çan karayoluna 2-3 km’lik bir yol ile bağlanır. Enterkonnekte sisteme bağlantısının yapıldığı trafo merkezi santrale kuş uçuşu 6.5 km uzaklıkta, 80 hektarlık kül sahası ise Kulfa köyünün kuzeybatısındadır. Santralin ihalesi 1997'de yapılmış, 2000'de ise temeli atılmıştır. 1. ünite Kasım 2003, 2. ünite Mart 2004'te üretime başlamıştır. Akışkan yataklı kazan teknolojisi Türkiye'de ilk kez bu santrale uygulanmıştır. 2 adet 160 Mw üzerine toplamda 320 Mw kurulu gücü ile yıllık 2080 GWh üretim kapasitesi vardır. 2019'da 2.134 GWh üretmiş olup bu da Türkiye tüketiminin yaklaşık %0.7'sini karşılamaktadır. 2020'de kireçtaşı yaş yıkama prosesi ile çalışan bacagazını sülfürden arındıracak tesisin kurulması amacıyla elektrik üretimi durdurulmuştur. Kaynakça Türkiye'deki kömür yakıtlı enerji santralleri
__label__tr Kanelür (Latince canna, Fransızca cannelure) antik mimarlıkta genellikle sütunlar yahut pilasterler üzerine yarım daire biçiminde derinlemesine açılmış, belirli bir fonksiyonu olmayan süs amaçlı oluklara verilen isimdir. Mimari öğeler
__label__tr Bulgaristan Silahlı Kuvvetleri (), Bulgaristan'ı dışarıdan gelebilecek askeri tehditlere karşı korumakla görevli silahlı kuvvetlerdir. Bulgaristan Cumhurbaşkanı aynı zamanda Silahlı Kuvvetlerin Başkomutanıdır. Askeri komuta Genelkurmay Başkanlığında iken, Siyasi liderlikten Savunma Bakanlığı sorumludur. Kara Kuvvetleri, Deniz Kuvvetleri ve Hava Kuvvetleri olmak üzere 3 ana birimden oluşur. Tarih boyunca ordu, ülkenin savunulmasında önemli bir rol oynamıştır. 1878 yılında bağımsızlığını kazanmasından sonra, Bulgaristan bölgesel bir askeri güç haline geldi ve birçok büyük savaşa katıldı - Sırp-Bulgar Savaşı (1885), Birinci Balkan Savaşı (1912-13), İkinci Balkan Savaşı (1913), I. Dünya Savaşı (1915-1918) ve II. Dünya Savaşı (1941-1944). Ordu bu savaşlarla önemli deneyim kazandı. Sırasında 1988 yılında Soğuk Savaş sırasında Bulgaristan Halk Cumhuriyeti, Varşova Paktı'nda yaklaşık 152.000 askeri bulunmaktaydı. Ülkede Komünist rejimin çökmesinden sonra ordunun mevcudu hızla aşağıya düşürüldü ve NATO yanlısı politikalar takip edilmeye başlandı. Bulgaristan 2004 yılında Kuzey Atlantik Antlaşması Örgütü'ne katıldı ve şu anda üç ülkede toplam 776 askeri bulunmaktadır. Kaynakça
__label__tr Strongsville, Amerika Birleşik Devletleri'nin Ohio eyaletinde yer alan ve Cuyahoga ilçesinde yer alan bir şehirdir. 26 Kasım 2009 tarihinde toplam nüfusu 44.750'dir. Demografi 2010 Sayımı 15 Mart 2010 tarihinde yapılan bir nüfus sayımına göre şehrin nüfusunun 44.750 kişi, 17.659 ev ve 12.563 aileden oluştuğu tespit edilmiştir. Şehirdeki nüfus dağılımının ise de %64,0 Beyaz, %33,0 Afrikan Amerikan, %0,1 Yerli Amerikan, %1,2 Asyalı, %0,6'sının ise de diğer halklardan oluştuğu tespit edilmiştir. 2000 Sayımı 15 Mart 2010 tarihinde yapılan bir nüfus sayımına göre şehrin nüfusunun 43.858 kişi, 16.209 ev ve 12.383 aileden oluştuğu tespit edilmiştir. Şehirdeki nüfus dağılımının ise de %64,0 Beyaz, %33,0 Afrikan Amerikan, %0,1 Yerli Amerikan, %1,2 Asyalı, %0,6'sının ise de diğer halklardan oluştuğu tespit edilmiştir. Kaynakça Dış bağlantılar Şehrin resmi web sitesi Ohio'daki şehirler
__label__tr Solomon Adaları millî futbol takımı, Solomon Adaları'nın millî futbol takımıdır ve Solomon Adaları Futbol Federasyonu tarafından idare edilmektedir. Solomon Adaları'nın şu ana kadar bir başarısı yoktur. Turnuva tarihi FIFA Dünya Kupası tarihi OFC Uluslar Kupası tarihi Pasifik Oyunları tarihi 1963 - Dördüncü 1966 - 1. Tur 1969 - Altıncı 1971 - Katılmadı 1975 - Üçüncü 1979 - Üçüncü 1983 - 1. Tur 1987 - Katılmadı 1991 - İkinci 1995 - İkinci 2003 - 1. Tur 2007 - Dördüncü 2011 - İkinci 2015 - 1. Tur Kaynakça
__label__tr Sirrüs (cirrus; Ci), yüksek seviyede (5–13 km) stratiform (katman) bir buluttur. 10 temel bulut tipi arasında en yüksek olanıdır. İpliksi, beyaz; yamalar halinde veya ince şeritler halindedir. Lifli ve ipeksi bir görünüme sahiptir. Yapısı Tümüyle buz kristallerinden meydana gelir. Çoğunlukla beyaz ve bazen açık gri renkteki sirrüs bulutu ince yapısı nedeniyle güneş ışığını kolaylıkla geçirir, gölge bırakmaz. Çoğu zaman yaklaşmakta olan bir cephe sisteminin veya tropikal siklonunun işareti olarak kabul edilir. Fakat, kümülonimbüs bulutlarının örs kısmında da oluşabilir. İpliksi ve tül biçimde gökyüzüne dağılan sirrüs bulutları, jet akımlarının yönü akımının yönüne göre gökyüzünde dağılırlar. Troposferin üst seviyelerinde rüzgarın saatteki hızı 150 ile 200 km hızda estiğinden ve sirrüsler de böylesi fırtınalar içinde oluştuklarından aynı yerde çok uzun süre kalmaz. Sirrüs türleri Sirrüs fibratus Sirrüs unkinus Sirrüs spissatus Sirrüs kastellanus Sirrüs flokküs Sirrüs çeşitleri İntortus Radiatus Vertebratus Duplikastus Kaynakça Bulut tipleri Latinceden Türkçeye geçen sözcükler
__label__tr Bunlar her yerde satılıyor.
__label__tr Mahjong'u çok seviyorum.
__label__tr Hava bulutlanıyor.
__label__tr Deneyelim!
__label__tr Şimşek çaktı.
__label__tr Amcamlarda yedik.
__label__tr Koyu kahverengi saçları vardı.
__label__tr Pardon ama radyoyu kısabilir misin acaba?
__label__tr Onunla beraber olduğun sürece mutlu olamazsın.
__label__tr Mahjong taşları çok güzeller.
__label__tr Bu Mahjong.
__label__tr Rap sever misin?
__label__tr Sadece beyaz kağıt yeterli.
__label__tr Evimin arkasında bir kilise var.
__label__tr Bu gemi okyanus yolculuğu için uygun değil.
__label__tr Satranç oynamayı biliyor musun?
__label__tr İş ben gelmeden önce bitmişti.
__label__tr Mum kendiliğinden söndü.
__label__tr Şu köpek elimi ısırmaya çalıştı.
__label__tr Sam Tom'dan iki yaş küçük.
__label__tr Bunlar benim kalemlerim.
__label__tr Düşmanla anlaşmaya vardılar.
__label__tr Sağlıklı olan adam sağlığın değerini bilmez.
__label__tr Yaşlı adam "Kedi mi?" diye sordu.
__label__tr Ummak bir strateji değildir.
__label__tr Babam bana yatakta kitap okumamamı söyledi.
__label__tr Devenin belini kıran son saman çöpüdür.
__label__tr John birçok şişe şarap içti.
__label__tr Sadece birkaç kişi beni anladı.
__label__tr Kapıyı kapatın, lütfen.
__label__tr Mahjong dünyada çok popüler olan oyunlardan biri.
__label__tr Merhaba, nasılsın?
__label__tr Japonca konuşamıyorum.
__label__tr Bu otobüs elli kişilik.
__label__tr Üstü kalsın.
__label__tr Tenis oynamak sağlıklıdır.
__label__tr Bazıları yalnızca zaman geçsin diye kitap okurlar.
__label__tr John cebinden bir anahtar çıkardı.
__label__tr Bu köprü on tondan fazlasını taşıyamaz.
__label__tr Dün on yedinci doğum günümdü.
__label__tr Hemen yolculuğa hazırlan.
__label__tr Günde en az yedi saat uyumak zorundayız.
__label__tr Birini tanıyorum da ötekini değil.
__label__tr Okulu sevmiyorum.
__label__tr Yakınlardaki küçük bir kasabada yaşıyordu.
__label__tr Mum kendi kendine söndü.
__label__tr Bu sadece bir şakaydı.
__label__tr Kulübe katılmaz mısın?
__label__tr John Bill'den daha zeki.
__label__tr Sana satranç oynamayı öğreteceğim.
__label__tr Babana en iyi dileklerimle.
__label__tr John, New York'ta yaşıyor.
__label__tr Kendimi nedense geceleri daha iyi hissediyorum.
__label__tr Artık seni sevmiyorum.
__label__tr Mum ışığını severim.
__label__tr John Bill kadar yaşlı değil; çok daha genç.
__label__tr Şu kız kim acaba.
__label__tr Bilmiyorum.
__label__tr John o kadar telaşlıydı ki konuşmaya vakti yoktu.
__label__tr Kimse benim fikirlerimi dinlemek istemiyor.
__label__tr Kendimi kendi tanrım olarak görüyorum.
__label__tr Sigara içmeyi bıraktım.
__label__tr Bunlar benim kitaplarım.
__label__tr Lütfen burayı imzalayın.
__label__tr Bu filmi sevdim.
__label__tr Mahjong'da çok iyiymiş.
__label__tr Tehlikenin farkında olmayabilir.
__label__tr Eve dönerken yağmura yakalanmıştım.
__label__tr Zor durumlarla başa çıkamıyor.
__label__tr Aşk onu rüyalarında görmektir.
__label__tr Şarkıları gençler arasında iyi biliniyor.
__label__tr Sporu rekabet için değil zevk için yapıyorum.
__label__tr İyi akşamlar Şikago.
__label__tr Bunlar bizim kitaplarımız.
__label__tr John Bill'in zayıflığından istifade etti.
__label__tr Onu on dolara aldım.
__label__tr Hayalim çok güçlü bir Mahjong oyuncusu olmak.
__label__tr John işe aşina.
__label__tr Koşucuyum.
__label__tr Hangi düğmeye basacağımı söyler misin lütfen?
__label__tr Üşüyüp ısıtıcıyı açtım.
__label__tr Kızın artık bir çocuk değil.
__label__tr Yalnızca birkaç kişi vaktinde geldi.
__label__tr Bütün insanlar hür, haysiyet ve haklar bakımından eşit doğarlar. Akıl ve vicdana sahiptirler ve birbirlerine karşı kardeşlik zihniyeti ile hareket etmelidirler.
__label__tr Ek olarak yaşlılar birbirleriyle sosyalleşebilsin ve Amerikan hayatının aktif üyeleri olarak kalabilsinler diye birçok topluluk kurulmuştur.
__label__tr Amerika'da arabalar yolun sağ tarafını kullanırlar.
__label__tr Zamanda geçmişe seyahat etmenin imkansız olduğu düşünülüyor.
__label__tr Bu oyunlar yetişkin kategorisi altında listelenmiş.
__label__tr Doğduğum yer olan Nagasaki, güzel bir liman kentidir.
__label__tr John o kadar sesli konuştu ki ikinci kattan bile duyabildim.
__label__tr Japoncayı Japonya'da mahjong oynamak için öğreniyorum.
__label__tr Elektronik sigaradan çıkan duman miktarı hiç fena değil.
__label__tr Go büyük ihtimalle benim ülkemdeki en popüler Japon oyunu olsa da o bile bazı üniversite öğrencileri dışında pek bilinmiyor.
__label__tr Tatoeba'ya yüzlerce cümle yazmak isterdim ama yapmam gereken şeyler var.
__label__tr Kulübe katılmak isteyenler lütfen buraya isimlerini yazsın.
__label__tr Geçen sene kurulan lunapark sağolsun şehir popüler oldu.
__label__ja セカンドレベルドメイン（Second-level domain）とは、トップレベルドメイン以下に属しているドメイン名のこと。略称はSLD。例えばwikipedia.orgの場合、「wikipedia」が「.org」と言うトップレベルドメインに属しているセカンドレベルドメイン名、となる。 国際化ドメイン名 このセカンドレベルドメインには、国際化ドメイン名と言って、英数字以外の文字列を登録することも出来る。例えば味の素の場合、国際化ドメイン名を使わない通常のドメイン名の場合 http://www.ajinomoto.co.jp/ となるが、国際化ドメイン名を使って http://味の素.jp/ と入力しても表示される。この国際化ドメイン名は.jp以外にも、.cnや.hkなどですでに実用化されている。ただし、国際化ドメイン名を利用する際には対応したブラウザを使用する必要がある（→国際化ドメイン名#対応しているブラウザ等参照）。 日本では、特に日本語でのセカンドレベルドメインのことを「日本語ドメイン名」と呼ぶ。 ccSLD 日本レジストリサービスを含むいくつかのレジストリにおいては、ドメイン登録者の属性を表すためにセカンドレベルドメインを用いている。この場合、例えば「jp」トップレベルドメインに属する「ne」セカンドレベルドメインは、ドメイン登録者がネットワークサービスであることを示し、「ac」セカンドレベルドメインは教育機関であることを示す。このようなセカンドレベルドメインをccSLDと呼ぶ。 関連項目 トップレベルドメイン ホスト名 国際化ドメイン名 Domain Name System（DNS） example.com 外部リンク Public Suffix List
__label__ja ウェストパームビーチ駅（英語：West Palm Beach Station）は、フロリダ州ウェストパームビーチ サウス・タマリンド・アヴェニュー209にある駅。全米各地を結ぶ旅客鉄道のアムトラックとマイアミ近郊の通勤輸送を担うが乗り入れている。昔のシーボード・エア・ライン鉄道の駅である。アメリカ合衆国国家歴史登録財に指定。 概要 当駅は、シーボード・エア・ライン鉄道の駅として1925年1月29日に開業した、1973年6月19日アメリカ合衆国国家歴史登録財に指定された。当駅は、都市間旅客と通勤鉄道、路線バス、タクシーのための結節点である。トライレールの乗客はバスやタクシーを使いパームビーチ国際空港へのアクセスする際に当駅を使用する。アムトラックは1971年にウェストパームビーチでの旅客サービスを開始し、トライレールは1989年にウェスト・パーム・ビーチとマイアミ間の旅客サービスを開始した。歴史的な駅舎の装飾用石材、外装石材、ドアや窓と鉄とタイル、電気設備、照明、配管、暖房設備、空調設備、赤瓦屋根を交換する工事が1991年4月に完成した。2012年夏には、市はより多くの訪問者を迎えるための改良プロジェクトを終えた。貝殻紋様仕上げの新しい歩道の設置や、パルメットヤシ、樫、マレーヤシが駅舎の周りに60本以上植栽され、ベンチも増設された。当該プロジェクトは、連邦道路管理局の交通強化助成金の75万ドル等により賄われた。 利用可能な鉄道路線／列車 アムトラックのウェストパームビーチ駅に発着する列車は下記の通り。 ニューヨークとマイアミ間の夜行長距離列車シルバー・メティオ号…1日1往復停車 ニューヨークとマイアミ間の夜行長距離列車…1日1往復停車 の発着路線は下記の通り。 駅と駅を結ぶ バス 当駅では下記のバスに連絡している。 中長距離バス… グレイハウンド (Greyhound) 路線バス… (Broward Palm Tran) 〔下表参照〕 ギャラリー 脚注 外部リンク アムトラック：ウェストパームビーチ駅 (英語) グレート・アメリカン・ステーションズ：ウェストパームビーチ駅 (英語) トライ・レール：ウェストパームビーチ駅 (英語) フロリダ州の鉄道駅 est Palm Beach アムトラックの鉄道駅 フロリダ州の国家歴史登録財 ウェストパームビーチ
__label__ja 上野 衣子（うえの きぬこ、旧姓：中村、1919年7月23日 - 2013年12月5日）は、日本のフィギュアスケート選手、フィギュアスケートコーチ兼国際スケート連盟公式審判員、日本スケート連盟審判部長。大阪市出身。神戸女学院大学卒。長女は同じくフィギュアスケート選手でのちに審判員となった平松純子（旧姓：上野）である。 経歴 稲田悦子、山下艶子と同じく永井康三に師事した。1934-1935年シーズンに行なわれた第6回全日本ジュニア選手権で優勝。1936-1937年シーズンの第8回全日本選手権と1937-1938年シーズンの第9回全日本選手権でともに稲田悦子、月岡芳子に次ぐ3位、1938-1939年シーズンの第10回全日本選手権で2位となった。しかし、1940年に開催が予定されていた札幌オリンピックは東京オリンピックとともに開催を返上、さらに戦争悪化により代替地での開催も中止となりオリンピック出場は果たせなかった。 戦後は、フィギュアスケートコーチとして活動した。 神戸フィギュアスケーティングクラブと神戸ポートアイランドフィギュアスケーティングクラブの設立に関わった。のちに国際スケート連盟の公認審判員となった。1972年札幌オリンピックではアシスタントレフェリーを、1980年レークプラシッドオリンピックでは審判員を務めた。神戸女子薬科大学の教授も務めた。 2013年12月5日、老衰のため死去。94歳没。 主な戦績 著書 フィギュアスケート: 図解コーチ（成美堂出版、1984年）ISBN 9784415004389 脚注 外部リンク 関連項目 フィギュアスケート選手一覧 日本の女子シングルスケーティング選手 日本のフィギュアスケートコーチ フィギュアスケート審判員 神戸薬科大学の教員 神戸女学院大学出身の人物 大阪市出身の人物 1919年生 2013年没
__label__ja 海野 数馬（うんの かずま、1889年（明治22年）6月22日 - 1971年（昭和46年）1月4日）は、明治時代後期から昭和時代の政治家、実業家。衆議院議員（3期）。 経歴 静岡市に生まれる。大井善吉の三男として生まれ、のち先代平作の養子となり1916年（大正5年）家督を相続し前名勇吉を改める。静岡県立静岡中学校退学。1911年（明治44年）日本大学法律科を卒業する。請負業を営む傍ら、静岡県農会議員、静岡県会議員を務めた。ほか財界では、昭和工業、昭和木材各社長を歴任した。 1928年（昭和3年）2月の第16回衆議院議員総選挙では静岡県第1区から立憲民政党所属で出馬し当選。つづく第17回、第18回総選挙でも当選し衆議院議員を3期務めた。 脚注 参考文献 衆議院・参議院編『議会制度百年史 - 衆議院議員名鑑』大蔵省印刷局、1990年。 静岡県選出の衆議院議員 (帝国議会) 昭和時代戦前の衆議院議員 静岡県議会議員 日本の実業家 日本大学出身の人物 静岡市出身の人物 静岡県立静岡高等学校出身の人物 1867年生 1936年没
__label__ja 癸未（みずのとひつじ、きすいのひつじ、きび）は、干支の一つ。 干支の組み合わせの20番目で、前は壬午、次は甲申である。陰陽五行では、十干の癸は陰の水、十二支の未は陰の土で、相剋（土剋水）である。 癸未の年 西暦年を60で割って23が余る年が癸未の年となる。 癸未の月 西暦年の下1桁が0・5（十干が庚・乙）の年の6月が癸未の月となる。ただしここでいう月は、旧暦の月や節月（小暑から立秋の前日まで）を適用する場合もある。 癸未の日 癸未の日の選日は以下の通り。 選日 癸未の日は小土の6日目である。 関連項目 みすのとひつし
__label__ja パウロ・ヴィニシウス・ソウザ・ドス・サントス（Paulo Vinícius Souza dos Santos , 1990年2月21日 - ）は、ブラジル・サンパウロ州サンパウロ出身のサッカー選手。ギリシャ・スーパーリーグ・レヴァディアコスFC所属。元ハンガリー代表。ポジションはディフェンダー（センターバック）。 クラブ歴 2008年に地元のサンパウロと契約するも、翌年ウルグアイに渡りリーベル・プレート・モンテビデオと契約。2010年4月25日のラシン・クルブ・デ・モンテビデオ戦でプロデビュー。2011年5月15日のCAペニャロール戦でプロ初ゴールを決めた。 2011年8月13日、ハンガリーリーグのヴィデオトンと契約。2014-15、2017-18シーズンはリーグ優勝。2018-19シーズンは国内カップ戦マジャル・クパで優勝するなど、10年にわたり中心選手として活躍した。 2019-20シーズン限りでヴィデオトンとの契約が満了。2020年7月31日にナシオナルと契約した。 代表歴 2017年にハンガリー国籍を取得。ハンガリー代表でのプレーが可能になり、同年3月25日の2018 FIFAワールドカップ・ヨーロッパ予選のポルトガル戦で代表デビュー。しかし、クリスティアーノ・ロナウドに2ゴールを決められるなど0-3で敗戦。予選リーグ敗退に終わり、UEFA主催の国際大会出場にも至っていない。 脚注 外部リンク Soccerway Transfermarkt ハンガリーのサッカー選手 ブラジルのサッカー選手 CAリーベル・プレート (ウルグアイ) の選手 MOLフェヘールヴァールFCの選手 ナシオナル・モンテビデオの選手 APOELニコシアの選手 レヴァディアコスFCの選手 サッカーハンガリー代表選手 帰化ハンガリー人のサッカー選手 アフリカ系ブラジル人のサッカー選手 ブラジル系ハンガリー人 アフリカ系ハンガリー人 サンパウロ出身の人物 1990年生 存命人物
__label__ja 中原 真吾（なかはら しんご、1994年4月13日 - ）は、NHKのアナウンサー。 略歴 広島県東広島市出身。 広島学院中学校・高等学校、慶應義塾大学経済学部卒業。 2017年に入局。主にスポーツ中継（甲子園大会、高校野球等）の実況、リポートを担当している。高校時代はテニス部に所属していた。 現在の担当番組 各種スポーツ中継 北海道のニュース・中継・リポート 過去の担当番組 山形放送局時代（2017年度 - 2019年度） どーも、NHK（2017年6月5日・新人お披露目） やままる（中谷文彦のキャスター代行など） 山形県内のニュース・中継・リポート ニュースやまがた845 NHKニュースおはよう山形 松江放送局時代（2020年度 - 2023年7月） ラジオインタビュー「島根から硫黄島へ 遺骨収集を続けて」NHKラジオ深夜便（2020年8月） NHKニュースおはようちゅうごく（代理キャスター）（2021年4月15日）（広島局への応援） あさイチ 『シェア旅島根』（2020年10月8日）ナビゲーター 『おでかけNAVI 島根県邑南町』（2021年6月8日） しまねっとNEWS610（キャスター：2021年3月29日 - 2022年4月1日）、長谷川史佳と隔週交代 サタデーウオッチ9（スポーツコーナー）（西川典孝の代行キャスター）（2022年11月26日） 第95回記念選抜高等学校野球大会 中継 実況・リポート（ラジオ第一）（2023年3月19日 - 3月28日） 島根県内のニュース、リポート スポーツ中継（高校野球等）実況、リポート しまねっと845（不定期） 札幌放送局時代（2023年8月 - ） 同期のアナウンサー 片平和宏（長崎→静岡） 後藤佑太郎（静岡→熊本） 是永千恵（鳥取→札幌） 瀬戸光（高知→岐阜） 鳥山圭輔（甲府→鳥取→広島） 堀菜保子（佐賀→札幌→東京アナウンス室→退職） 増村聡太（徳島→和歌山→名古屋） 松井大（宮崎→秋田→広島） 森田茉里恵（新潟→仙台→東京アナウンス室） 矢崎智之（岡山→東京アナウンス室） 山内泉（金沢→東京アナウンス室） 脚注 注釈 出典 外部リンク NHKアナウンスルーム・中原真吾 NHKのアナウンサー 慶應義塾大学出身の人物 広島県出身の人物 1994年生 存命人物
__label__ja シェミャノヴィツェ・シロンスキェ ( , ）は、ポーランドの都市。シロンスク県に属する。市の南部で同県の中心都市カトヴィツェ、西部でホジューフと接している。 歴史 19世紀後半、ドイツ帝国のもとで工業化が進められた。第一次世界大戦後にポーランド領となる。1923年にシェミャノヴィツェ () とフタ・ラウラ () が合併してシェミャノヴィツェ・シロンスキェが成立した。1932年に都市としての地位を認められた。第二次世界大戦中にナチス・ドイツの支配下におかれ、ラウラヒュッテと呼称されたが、戦後再びポーランド領となった。かつてはカトヴィツェ県に属していたが、行政区の再編にともない、1999年よりシロンスク県に属することになった。 姉妹都市 ケーテン (アンハルト)（ドイツ） ワットルロー（フランス） （チェコ） モハーチ（ハンガリー） クンピア・トゥルジー（ルーマニア） 外部リンク シェミャノヴィツェ・シロンスキェの公式サイト（ポーランド語） 旅行 オールドの写真 しえみやのういつえしろんすきえ
__label__ja 『スーヴニール2001』（SOUVENIR2001）は、1993年7月1日に発売されたピチカート・ファイヴの企画アルバム。 解説 同年6月1日に発売されたばかりのオリジナル・アルバム『ボサ・ノヴァ2001』から2曲をカット。その代わりに本作用に2曲を新たに収録した。 パッケージは日本コロムビアの絵本付ソフトウェア・コロちゃんパック仕様。完全生産限定盤で現在廃盤。 収録曲 ロックン・ロール rock'n roll 詞／曲／編曲：小西康陽 メッセージ・フロム・ミス・ピチカート・ファイブ message from pizzicato five 曲：小西康陽・小山田圭吾・野宮真貴 編曲：小西康陽・小山田圭吾 本作のみ収録。『ボサ・ノヴァ2001』には未収録。 マジック・カーペット・ライド magic carpet ride 詞／曲／編曲：小西康陽 我が名はグルーヴィー groovie is my name 詞／曲／編曲：小西康陽 ピース・ミュージック peace music 詞：野宮真貴 曲／編曲：高浪敬太郎 ストロベリィ・スレイライド strawberry sleighride 詞／曲／編曲：小西康陽 スリーパー sleeper 詞：野宮真貴 曲／編曲：高浪敬太郎 優しい木曜日 sweet thursday 詞／曲／編曲：小西康陽 レイン・ソング rain song 詞：野宮真貴 曲／編曲：高浪敬太郎 ゴー・ゴー・ダンサー go go dancer 詞／曲／編曲：小西康陽 皆既日食 eclipse 詞／曲／編曲：高浪敬太郎 愛の神話 saga 詞／曲／編曲：高浪敬太郎 ハレルヤ・ハレクリシュナ hallelujah hare krishna 詞／曲／編曲：高浪敬太郎 クレオパトラ2001 cleopatra 2001 詞：小西康陽 曲／編曲：小山田圭吾 マジック・カーペット・ライド （Instrumental） magic carpet ride featuring：readymade strings 曲／編曲：小西康陽 本作のみ収録。『ボサ・ノヴァ2001』には未収録。 脚注 TRIADのアルバム 1993年のアルバム 日本コロムビアのアルバム ピチカート・ファイヴのアルバム
__label__ja ジャニーヌ・マリー・クレメンティヌ・リュエフ（Jeanine Marie Clementine Rueff, 1922年2月5日 - 1999年9月）は、フランスの女流作曲家。主に室内楽曲・独奏曲の分野で活動した。 経歴 パリに生まれ、パリ国立高等音楽院でアンリ・ビュッセルに師事して作曲を学び、1948年にローマ賞を受賞。後にパリ国立高等音楽院の和声学の教授も務めた。マルセル・ミュール、ダニエル・デファイエら著名なサクソフォーン奏者と親交があり、彼女自身もサクソフォーンのための音楽の作曲者として有名である。 主要作品 シャンソンとパスピエ（アルトサクソフォーンとピアノのための） Chanson et Paspied Pour Saxophone Alto et Piano （1951年） サクソフォーン四重奏のためのコンセール Concert en Quatuor Pour Quatuor de Saxophones （1955年） ※「サクソフォーンのための演奏会用四重奏曲」とも。 ソナタ（サクソフォーン・ソロのための） Sonata pour saxophone seul （1967年） 出典 フランスの作曲家 近現代の作曲家 パリ国立高等音楽・舞踊学校の教員 1922年生 1999年没
__label__ja 『Mr.レディMr.マダム3 ウエディングベル』（ミスターレディ ミスターマダム スリー ウエディングベル、La Cage aux Folles 3 - 'Elles' se marient）は、1985年のフランス・イタリア合作のコメディ映画。監督はジョルジュ・ロートネル、出演はミシェル・セローとウーゴ・トニャッツィなど。の舞台劇『ラ・カージュ・オ・フォール』を原作とした1978年の映画『Mr.レディMr.マダム』のシリーズ第3弾。ストーリーは映画オリジナル。 『ウエディングベル/Mr.レディMr.マダム3』と表記されることもある。 ストーリー レナートとアルバンは熟年のゲイカップル。ある日、スコットランドに住むアルバンの伯母が亡くなり、莫大な遺産が手に入ることになる。しかし、相続の条件はアルバンが18ヶ月以内に嫡子をもうけるということ。それが叶わない場合、遺産は従弟のモーティマーのものとなる。クラブの経営が思わしくないレナートは、遺産を得るために一計を案じ、アルバンを「男」として訓練し、仮の結婚をさせようとする。そんなレナートに失望したアルバンは家を出て行く。 キャスト アルバン・ムージェット（ザザ・ナポリ）: ミシェル・セロー - 主人公でクラブの看板スター。 レナート・バルディ: ウーゴ・トニャッツィ - ナイトクラブ経営者。アルバンの「夫」。 シンディ: アントネッラ・インテルレンギ モーティマー: サヴェリオ・ヴァローネ - アルバンの従弟。 シモン・シャリエ: ミシェル・ガラブリュ - 保守政党の政治家。 ジャコブ: - レナートとアルバンの世話をしているオカマの黒人メイド。 出典 関連項目 ラ・カージュ・オ・フォール バードケージ セルロイド・クローゼット 外部リンク 1985年の映画 1985年のLGBT関連映画 フランスのコメディ映画 イタリアのコメディ映画 フランスのLGBT関連映画 イタリアのLGBT関連映画 LGBT関連コメディ映画 ゲイ関連映画 女装映画 結婚を題材とした映画作品 フランスで製作された映画作品 エンニオ・モリコーネの作曲映画 コロンビア映画の作品 トライスター・ピクチャーズの作品 戯曲を原作とする映画作品 ラ・カージュ・オ・フォール
__label__ja ヒューゴ・ビルイェル（、1854年1月12日 - 1887年6月17日）は、スウェーデンの画家である。 略歴 ストックホルムに生まれた。父親は版画出版の仕事をしていた。1870年から1877年までスウェーデン王立美術院で学び、1877年に、留学の奨学金が与えられるロイヤル・メダルを受賞した。 スウェーデン王立美術学校予備課程時代の同級生には、カール・ラーション、ペール・エークストレム、アーンシュト・ユーセフソン がいる。 1877年にパリへ留学し、1878年の夏は、スウェーデンの画家カール・ラーションとフランスの風景画家が集まったバルビゾンで過ごした。1879年にサロン・ド・パリに初めて出展した。1880年には女性を描いた人物画を出展した。1881年からスペインを旅し、1882年にグラナダでMathilda Gadeaと結婚した。夫妻はパリやグレー＝シュル＝ロワンに滞在した後、グラナダに戻った。グラナダから北アフリカを訪れた。この旅で一連のスペインやアフリカの風景を描いた作品が生まれた。 その後もパリやスウェーデンのヨーテボリや海岸の町で作品を描き、サロン・ド・パリに出展を続けた。1887年に健康を害し、パリからスウェーデンに戻る途中にヘルシンボリのホテルで没した。33歳であった。 主な作品 脚注 参考文献 東京都庭園美術館他編『スウェーデンの国民画家 カール・ラーション展』読売新聞社他、1994年。 19世紀スウェーデンの画家 ストックホルム出身の人物 1854年生 1887年没
__label__ja ギンダ(,)はエリトリア・セメナウィ・ケイバハリ地方・ギンダ地区の都市。北緯15度27分、東経39度5分。人口21,523人（2005年推計）。アスマラからマッサワへ向かう国道P-1号線上のマアカル地方との境付近の標高約900mの高地に存在する。また国道のほかマッサワ-アスマラ鉄道のギンダ駅も利用できる。野菜や果物の生産地であり、ティグレ人のムスリムの中心地でもある。ギンダはサバルグマ(Sabarguma)の泉の近くにある。レモン農場は、イタリアの占領下でエリトリア初の鉄道を敷設したイタリア人、カルロ・カヴァンナによって開拓されたものである。 脚注 関連項目 エリトリア関係記事の一覧 エリトリアの都市の一覧 エリトリアの都市 セメナウィ・ケイバハリ地方
__label__ja 下佐谷村 助六（しもさやむら すけろく、? - 安永8年9月16日（1779年10月25日））は、江戸時代中期の一揆指導者、義民。通称、与惣左衛門。 経歴・人物 大身旗本（交代寄合）である本堂氏の知行地（志筑藩参照。当時の領主は本堂親房）であった常陸国新治郡下佐谷村（現在の茨城県かすみがうら市下佐谷）の百姓。増税に反対した志筑藩領の25の村の百姓が集まり、安永7年12月28日（1779年2月14日 ）領主の江戸屋敷に押しかけ強訴した助六一揆を指導。頭取として捕えられ獄門に処された。 首は下佐谷村でひそかに埋葬され、「助六の首塚」としてかすみがうら市指定文化財となっている。 脚注 町役人・村役人 義民 刑死した日本の人物 常陸国の人物 かすみがうら市の歴史 生年不明 1779年没
__label__ja 奥野 翔太（おくの しょうた、1995年 - ）は、日本の実業家、起業家。株式会社Plott代表取締役CEO。 概要 三重県出身。筑波大学情報学群情報科学類卒業。在学中に、株式会社クロノファクトリーにて事業ディレクターとして勤務し、起業家・経営者を志すようになる。その後は、大学4年で休学しながら、Webメディア運営やゲーム制作・分散型動画メディア運営を経験し、ARコンテンツ制作のGraffity株式会社にてiOSエンジニアとして勤務していった。その後、株式会社Plottの前身となるファボを起業し、CEOに就任。2019年より「テイコウペンギン」を立ち上げ、その後複数のYouTubeアニメをリリースした。 人物 両親が関西出身であり、親の転勤による転校が多く、小さい頃から新しく人と関わりを持つことにはとても前のめりだった。小学校から高校までサッカーをやっていた。 脚注 関連項目 Plott 外部リンク 存命人物 1995年生 三重県出身の人物 筑波大学出身の人物 21世紀日本の実業家 日本の起業家
__label__ja 札ノ辻駅（ふだのつじえき）は、かつて滋賀県大津市にあった京阪神急行電鉄（現・阪急電鉄）京津線の停留場。 札の辻と京町1丁目境（駅廃止時の町名は上京町）の滋賀県道558号高島大津線（旧国道161号）と京町通、北国海道の交差点、現在の京町一丁目交差点付近にあり、京津線開業時の大津側終点であった。 歴史 1912年（大正元年）8月15日：京津電気軌道の終着駅として開業。 1925年（大正14年） 2月1日：会社合併に伴い京阪電気鉄道京津線の停留場となる。 5月5日：札ノ辻 - 浜大津（現・びわ湖浜大津駅）間の延伸開業に伴い途中駅となる。 1943年（昭和18年）10月1日：陸上交通事業調整法により、京阪電気鉄道が阪神急行電鉄と合併し、京阪神急行電鉄となる。 1945年（昭和20年）5月15日：太平洋戦争の激化に伴い休止。 1946年（昭和21年）10月1日：廃止。 隣の駅 京阪電気鉄道 京津線 上栄町駅 - 札ノ辻駅 - 浜大津駅 脚注 注釈 出典 関連項目 日本の鉄道駅一覧 廃駅 大津市の廃駅 たのつしえき 京阪電気鉄道の廃駅 1912年開業の鉄道駅 1946年廃止の鉄道駅
__label__ja リットンファミリーは、お笑いコンビ・リットン調査団が率いている吉本興業内のグループ。または「リットン軍団」ともいわれる。 概要 ファミリーの全貌は明らかになっていないが、2003年6月19日に朝日放送で放送された「ナンバ壱番館」の「リットン・ファミリー特集」においてバッファロー吾郎、ケンドーコバヤシ、笑い飯、千鳥、友近、山里亮太（南海キャンディーズ）、レイザーラモン、ネゴシックス、なだぎ武（元スミス夫人、ザ・プラン9）、土肥ポン太（元スキヤキ）、野性爆弾、天津、ルチャダテリブレ、べっぴん山、中山功太の存在が確認されている。 リットンファミリーの特徴として、ファミリーに属する芸人の多くがマニアックネタやプロレスネタ、下ネタなど、あまり一般には評価されない芸を得意にしていることが挙げられる。これについて、2005年2月19日に放送された「めちゃ²イケてるッ!」のコーナー「笑わず嫌い王決定戦」にバッファロー吾郎が登場した際、岡村隆史（ナインティナイン）が「男子（男性ではない）ウケする芸風」と形容した。それ以外にも友近やネゴシックス、南海キャンディーズなど独特のセンスを持つ芸人が多いため、流行に左右されない独自路線を進むマニアックな芸人をファミリーの如何に関わらず、「リットンファミリー（のようだ）」と呼ぶこともある。 その特異性ゆえに「売れない落ちこぼれの集まり」と認識されていたリットンファミリーだが、M-1グランプリにおいて笑い飯や千鳥、南海キャンディーズが決勝に残ったことから注目されるようになった。近年は友近、ネゴシックス、レイザーラモンの活躍によって関西のお笑い界では一大勢力になりつつある。 2005年10月24日にテレビ朝日で放送された「アメトーク!」ではバッファロー吾郎を中心とした「バッファロー・ファミリー」として、ケンドーコバヤシ、笑い飯、南海キャンディーズ、レイザーラモンが登場したが、。 2021年12月19日に関西テレビで放送された「お笑いワイドショー マルコポロリ!」『リットン調査団・バッファロー竹若・なだぎ・ケンコバ・ザコシ 伝説のリットン軍団大集合SP』ではバッファロー吾郎の竹若、なだぎ武、ケンドーコバヤシ、ハリウッドザコシショウが出演しトークを繰り広げた。 脚注 吉本興業
__label__ja バンヴィラール （Banvillars）は、フランス、ブルゴーニュ＝フランシュ＝コンテ地域圏、テリトワール＝ド＝ベルフォール県のコミューン。 地理 村は旧国道83号線から約1km離れている。ベルフォールからオート＝ソーヌ県のエリクール方面へ約6km、緑豊かで緩やかな丘の田舎の風景が残る。 由来 Banvilliers（1130年）、Banviler（1303年）、Bannweiler（1521年または1525年）Banvillars（1655年）、Banvillard（1793年）。 歴史 鉄道建設中の1850年代、バヴィリエにつながるローマ街道の遺跡が発見された。1257年、村はモンベリアル伯の支配下にあった。村の小さな礼拝堂、聖アンブロワーズ礼拝堂は、ブレヴィリエ（現在はオート＝ソーヌ県のコミューン）の教区に属していた。モンベリアル伯ルノー・ド・ブルゴーニュの死去から約10年後である1339年、バンヴィラールの封土はフェレット伯のものとなった。 バンヴィラールの城は、ボー・ボワと呼ばれる小山の上にあった。中世に建設された城は、1633年頃ベルフォール周辺を荒らしまわっていたスウェーデン人傭兵たちによって破壊されてしまった。城跡は、1890年頃にベルフォール要塞の城壁の一部とみなされたバンヴィラール要塞が建設された際に、失われた。 人口統計 参照元:1962年から1999年までは複数コミューンに住所登録をする者の重複分を除いたもの。それ以降は当該コミューンの人口統計によるもの。1999年までEHESS/Cassini、2006年以降INSEE 参照 テリトワール・ド・ベルフォール県のコミューン
__label__ja 『星街すいせい・田所あずさ 平行線すくらんぶる』（ほしまちすいせい たどころあずさ へいこうせんすくらんぶる）は、2021年4月4日から2023年10月1日まで文化放送・超!A&G+にて配信されていたインターネットラジオ番組。パーソナリティは声優の田所あずさとVTuberの星街すいせい。 概要 声優の田所あずさと「ホロライブプロダクション」所属のVTuber・星街すいせいがダブルでパーソナリティを務めるラジオ番組。2020年4月から2021年3月まで同じく超!A&G+にて配信された星街が初冠ラジオ番組としてパーソナリティを務めた『ホロライブ presents 星街すいせいのMUSIC SPACE』の後続番組である。 「交わらない平行線な世界の2人がこのラジオで交わる？」をコンセプトに、声優とVTuberの垣根を越え、スクランブルさせていくといったものであった。 配信時間 2021年4月4日 - 2023年10月1日 日曜日 17:00 - 17:30 パーソナリティ 田所あずさ 星街すいせい ピンチヒッター（いずれも星街の代役） 白上フブキ（2021年9月12日配信分） 桃鈴ねね（2021年9月19日配信分） さくらみこ（2022年6月5日・6月12日・10月16日 - 11月6日） 主なコーナー メール紹介 ふつおたとして募集したメールを紹介していた。 バーチャルさんと声優さんと普通の人 シチュエーションごとのバーチャルや声優、普通の世界での違いについてリスナーにメールを募集した。第1回から配信されていたが、その後は不定期コーナーとなっていた。 イベント 星街すいせい・田所あずさ 平行線すくらんぶる 祝3年目突入イベント 2023年5月5日に山野ホールにて開催された番組初のイベント。 出典 外部リンク 超!A&G+ 2021年の日本のWebラジオ ホロライブプロダクション
__label__ja 海岸山脈（かいがん-さんみゃく）は、台湾の山脈。台湾島東部を南北に縦貫する山脈で、台湾の五大山脈の一つ。北は花蓮県から南は台東県まで、その長さはおよそ150kmに及び、東西の幅は約10kmとなっている。一般的に、海岸山脈を横断する秀姑巒渓を境として南北2つに分けられる。 北部 海岸山脈北部は、花蓮渓の河口にある花蓮山を北端とし（地質学者は花蓮市の美崙山、花岡山も海岸山脈の名残の丘だと考えている）、賀田山、月眉山、六階鼻山、八里湾山、大奇山を経て秀姑巒渓に到達する。このうち八里湾山が北部の最高峰となるが、その高さは標高900mにも満たない。 省道台11甲線光豊公路のほか米棧-水璉産業道路や奉公越嶺路などの古道が山脈を横切っている。 南部 瑞穂郷奇美よりも南が南部になる。南部を構成する主な山は、北から里牙津山、三間屋山、北花東山、成広澳山、新港山、都蘭山などがあり、南端で卑南渓に達する。この間、東河と富里を結ぶ東富公路、台30線玉長公路、安通越嶺路などの古道が山脈を横断している。山々の標高は1,000m前後で、おおよそ北から南に行くにつれて高くなっている。最高峰は標高1,680mの新港山。 地質 海岸山脈はフィリピン群島が流れ着いてできた陸地であり、地質は緑島や蘭嶼と同じく安山岩による火山岩が集まって構成されている。海岸山脈が属するフィリピン海プレートと花東縦谷から西の地域が属するユーラシアプレートとは互いに衝突していることから、花東地区は台湾で最も地震が頻発する地区となっている。 ギャラリー 関連項目 台湾の地理 アジアの山地 台湾の山脈
__label__ja 菅原 在良（すがわら の ありよし）は、平安時代中期から後期にかけての貴族、歌人。和泉守大学頭・菅原定義の子。菅原孝標女は叔母。官位は従四位上・式部大輔。菅原氏長者。贈従三位。 経歴 寛治元年（1087年）に式部少輔・大内記を兼任。嘉保3年（1096年）に文章博士。天永2年（1111年）式部大輔を務める。同年12月に昇殿を聴され、さらに侍読に任ぜられ鳥羽天皇に仕える。保安2年（1121年）もしくは保安3年（1122年）卒去。享年80（または81）。その他御書殿別当、摂津守を歴任した。ちなみに在良の勘申により、永久、藤原俊信との勘申で長治の元号が採用された。 元徳2年（1330年）に従三位が贈られた（北野三位殿）。子孫は唐橋家となる。 歌人として 承保3年（1076年）に、『前右衞門佐經仲歌合』に参加。藤原忠通の奨めで和歌を詠んだといわれ、勅撰和歌集には『新勅撰和歌集』以下5首が入首。家集には『在良朝臣集』がある。 系譜 父：菅原定義 母：藤原実方の娘。 妻：源長親の娘 男子：菅原時登（1070-1139） 男子：菅原清能（1073-1130） 妻：三宮大進 女子：花園左大臣家小大進（?-?） 妻：不詳 男子：菅原善弘 男子：菅原信永 男子：菅原為恒 男子：俊源 男子：俊永 女子：殷富門院大輔（1130頃-1200頃） 女子：藤原信成室 脚注 参考文献 『尊卑分脈』 ありよし ありよし 平安時代後期の貴族 平安時代の歌人 1043年生 1122年没 1121年没
__label__ja オスカル・レーヴ（Oscar Loew、1844年4月2日 - 1941年1月26日）は、明治時代にお雇い外国人として来日したドイツの化学者である。名はオスカー、姓はレーブ、ロイブ、ロイーブ等とも表記される。 経歴・人物 バイエルン州の生まれ。ミュンヘン大学でユストゥス・フォン・リービッヒ、ライプツィヒ大学でヘルマン・コルベのそれぞれの門下となり、化学や生理学を学ぶ。 卒業後の1866年に渡米し、ニューヨーク大学で助手となり、医学の教鞭を執る。その後帰国して、母校で生理学の教鞭を執った。1893年（明治26年）（1892年（明治25年）とも）に日本政府の招きにより来日した。 来日後東京帝国大学農科学科（現在の東京大学農学部）のお雇いとなり、そこで化学等の教鞭を執った。滞日中の1897年（明治30年）に病気のため一旦帰国し、再度渡米した。農務省に勤務しタバコの新酵素を発見した。1900年（明治33年）（1901年（明治34年）とも）再来日し、再度東京帝国大学で教鞭を執った。また、古在由直、麻生慶次郎、鈴木梅太郎等の著名な化学者を輩出し、日本における農学の近代化に貢献した。 1907年（明治40年）に任期満了となり、帰国。帰国後は母校であるミュンヘン大学やベルリン大学で教鞭を執り、医学の研究に携わった。 出典 デジタル版 日本人名大辞典+Plus（講談社）『ロイーブ』‐ コトバンク 日本大百科全書（小学館）『レーブ』‐ コトバンク 20世紀 西洋人名大辞典（日外アソシエーツ）『オスカー ロイブ』‐ コトバンク 19世紀ドイツの化学者 20世紀ドイツの化学者 国立科学アカデミー・レオポルディーナ会員 ニューヨーク大学の教員 東京大学の教員 明治時代のお雇い外国人 在日ドイツ人 バイエルン州出身の人物 ルートヴィヒ・マクシミリアン大学ミュンヘン出身の人物 ライプツィヒ大学出身の人物 1844年生 1941年没
__label__ja 加治木郵便局（かじきゆうびんきょく）は、鹿児島県姶良市にある郵便局。民営化前の分類では集配普通郵便局であった。 沿革 1872年8月4日（明治5年7月1日） - 加治木郵便取扱所として開設。 1875年（明治8年）1月1日 - 加治木郵便局（五等）となる。 1880年（明治13年）5月10日 - 為替取扱を開始。 1882年（明治15年） - 貯金取扱を開始。 1891年（明治24年）3月21日 - 加治木郵便電信局となる。 1903年（明治36年）4月1日 - 通信官署官制の施行に伴い加治木郵便局となる。 1949年（昭和24年）3月1日 - 特定郵便局から普通郵便局に局種別改定。 1956年（昭和31年）10月11日 - 電話通話および和文電報受付事務の取扱を開始。 1972年（昭和47年）12月 - 局舎新築落成。 1999年（平成11年） - 外国通貨の両替および旅行小切手の売買に関する業務取扱を開始。 2007年（平成19年）10月1日 - 民営化に伴い、併設された郵便事業加治木支店に一部業務を移管。 2012年（平成24年）10月1日 - 日本郵便株式会社発足に伴い、郵便事業加治木支店を加治木郵便局に統合。 2017年（平成29年）10月23日 - 姶良郵便局から集配業務を移管。 取扱内容 郵便、印紙、ゆうパック、内容証明 貯金、為替、振替、振込、国際送金、国債、投資信託 生命保険、バイク自賠責保険、自動車保険 ゆうちょ銀行ATM 姶良市内の一部地域（加治木地域、帖佐地域）の集配業務 ゆうゆう窓口 周辺 姶良市役所 加治木総合支所 タイヨー加治木店 山形屋ストア加治木店 国道10号 アクセス JR日豊本線 加治木駅から徒歩約9分 九州自動車道、隼人道路 加治木ICから南西に約1.5km 駐車場あり：18台 脚注 外部リンク 加治木郵便局 - 日本郵政 かしき 姶良市の建築物
__label__ja 「ふりむいて抱きしめて」（ふりむいてだきしめて）はWANDSの2枚目のシングル。 内容 1stアルバム『WANDS』の先行シングルで、WANDSが初めて自作曲に挑んだ作品。 1994年の再発盤では「もっと強く抱きしめたなら」以降のようにジャケットの折り畳み用線がなくなっている。 ミュージックビデオ 映像作品『BEST OF WANDS VIDEO HISTORY』には「ふりむいて抱きしめて」のビデオクリップと、「Baby Baby Baby」のライヴ映像（ダイジェスト）が収録されている。 収録曲 楽曲解説 ふりむいて抱きしめて テレビ朝日系『OH!エルくらぶ』オープニングテーマ 歌詞は上杉昇が女性にふられた腹いせに書かれたと語っている。 ダンサブルな曲に仕上がっており、「時の扉」と「Jumpin' Jack Boy」のカップリング曲の「White Memories」も候補にあったが、ダンサンブル・チューンをリリースしたいというメンバーの意向から「ふりむいて抱きしめて」が2枚目のシングルとなった。 Baby Baby Baby 子守唄らしきサウンドから始まっている。 収録アルバム WANDS (#1) SINGLES COLLECTION+6 (#1) WANDS BEST 〜HISTORICAL BEST ALBUM〜 (#1) WANDS BEST HITS (#1) vocal compilation 90's hits Vol.1〜male〜 at the BEING studio (#1) BEST OF WANDS HISTORY (#2) 参加ミュージシャン 岩切玲子：コーラス（#1-3） 関連項目 WANDS 上杉昇 柴崎浩 大島こうすけ 脚注 WANDSの楽曲 1992年のシングル 上杉昇が制作した楽曲 大島こうすけが制作した楽曲 TMファクトリーのシングル りむいてたきしめて
__label__ja 那須 宗久（なす むねひさ）は、鎌倉時代初期の武士とされる伝説上の人物。宮崎県椎葉村に伝わる鶴富姫伝説で知られる。通称は大八郎。 概要 弓の名手として有名な那須宗高（与一）の弟とされる。江戸時代中期に編纂された『椎葉山由来記』によると、源頼朝の命を受け、病身の兄・宗高の代理として、宗高の次男とされる宗昌ら手勢を率いて、日向国椎葉へ平氏残党の追討に向かい、元久2年（1205年）向山の平氏残党を討つ。次いで椎葉に進撃するが、平氏残党が農耕に勤しみ、戦意を喪失している様を目の当たりにし、追討を取り止め、幕府には討伐を果たした旨を報告した。宗久はそのまま椎葉に滞在し、屋敷を構え、農耕技術を伝え、平家の守り神である厳島神社を勧請するなどして落人達を慰めた。また、平清盛の末孫とされる鶴富姫を寵愛し、鶴富は妊娠したが、その直後の貞応元年（1222年）に宗久は鎌倉より帰還命令を受けたという。宗久は「やがて安産なし男子出生に於ては我が本国下野の国へ連れ越すべし、女子なる時は其身に遣す」と言って太刀と系図を与え帰国したと伝わる。その後、鶴富は女子を生み、長じて婿を取り、婿が那須下野守を名乗って椎葉を支配したといわれる。戦国時代に椎葉を治めた国人・那須氏は、宗久と鶴富の子孫とされる。 元久元年（1204年）に平家追討の宣旨が出されているが、その追捕使が那須宗久であったという記録は無く、椎葉の伝説にのみ残る人物である。また『椎葉山由来記』の記載によると、元久2年に椎葉に入り、3年間滞在したというが、椎葉を去ったとされる貞応元年は17年後であり、矛盾がある。 伝承 椎葉村下福良には、宗久が植えたものと伝えられている八村杉があり、国の天然記念物に指定されている。 椎葉という地名は、宗久が陣小屋を椎の葉で覆ったことに由来して名付けられたと言われる。 五ヶ瀬町の鞍岡という地名は、宗久が行軍の際、山が険しく馬を乗り捨てたことから「鞍置」と呼ばれていたのが、転じて鞍岡と名付けられたと言われる。 その他 椎葉村下福良には、江戸期に庄屋を務めた那須家住宅（国の重要文化財）がある。この住宅は鶴富屋敷と通称されるが、現存する建物は江戸時代後期、文政6年（1823年）頃の建立である。 民謡「ひえつき節」では、宗久と鶴富姫の伝説を題材として「那須の大八鶴富置いて椎葉立つときゃ目に涙」などと歌われるが、この歌詞は元々あった労働歌に昭和15年（1940年）になってから加えられたものである。 現在でも椎葉村には「那須」姓が多い。 脚注 関連項目 那須氏 『Routes -ルーツ-』 - Leaf制作のビジュアルノベルゲーム。シナリオの一つのRoots編は『鶴富姫伝説』をモチーフとしている。 鎌倉時代の武士 むねひさ 那須与一 日本の伝説の人物
__label__ja 桑納（かんのう）は、八千代市の地名。睦地区に位置する。桑納川の河口がある。郵便番号は276-0006。 河川 桑納川 隣接する地域 桑橋 島田台 麦丸 米本 島田 人口 39世帯：総人口92人（男：47人 / 女：45人） 施設 天満宮 薬師堂厳島神社 神明神社 妙見神社 教育 小学校 八千代市立睦小学校 交通 桑納橋 脚注 八千代市の町・字 八千代市の歴史
__label__ja 「Cymbals」（シンバルズ）は、久保田利伸の楽曲。1997年2月21日にSony Recordsから19枚目のシングルとして発売された。 概要 「Cymbals」は、TBS系金曜ドラマ『君が人生の時』の主題歌。柿崎洋一郎との共同プロデュース。 2005年8月24日にマキシシングルで再発売。 収録曲 カバー ATSUSHI from EXILE - 2004年に発売のトリビュート・アルバム『SOUL TREE〜a musical tribute to toshinobu kubota〜』に収録。2009年10月に開催された『EXH SPECIAL EXILE ATSUSHI PREMIUM LIVE SOLO』で演奏された。 三浦大知 - 2010年の『DAICHI MIURA LIVE TOUR 2010 〜GRAVITY〜』で演奏。 脚注 出典 外部リンク 1997年のシングル 久保田利伸の楽曲 TBS金曜ドラマの主題歌 久保田利伸が制作した楽曲 ソニー・ミュージックレコーズのシングル んはるす
__label__ja この項では、1990年代初頭からのウェブブラウザの変遷を紹介する。ブラウザが生まれる以前には、多くの技術やシステムが情報の伝達や閲覧のために存在していた。初期のWebブラウザの詳細は、ウェブブラウザの記事を参照のこと。 図による年表 タイムライン 次の表は、より一般的なWebブラウザ用に1993年以降のメジャーリリース日をまとめたものである。 * 初版リリース † 今後のリリースの予定なし 脚注 ねんひよう インターネットの歴史
__label__ja 栗田 卓也（くりた たくや、1961年〈昭和36年〉8月31日 - ）は、日本の建設・国土交通官僚。 経歴 大阪府生まれ。甲陽学院高等学校を経て、1984年3月に京都大学法学部を卒業。国家公務員採用上級甲種試験(法律)に合格して、1984年4月に建設省に入省した。 都市局長、総合政策局長などを歴任する。 2019年7月9日、国土交通審議官に就任し、国土関係施策・北海道開発関係施策の総括整理を担当。 2020年7月21日、国土交通事務次官に就任。 2021年7月1日、国土交通事務次官を退任。 年表 基本的な出典 1984年 3月：京都大学法学部卒業 4月：建設省入省 1990年7月：建設省近畿地方建設局道路部路政課長 1991年7月：建設省近畿地方建設局総務部人事課長 1993年4月：宮崎県企画調整部総合交通課長 1995年4月：宮崎県企画調整部企画調整課長 1996年 4月：建設省大臣官房人事課課長補佐 7月：建設省都市局都市計画課課長補佐 1998年7月：建設省大臣官房人事課課長補佐 2000年7月：建設省大臣官房文書課建設専門官 2001年 1月：国土交通省大臣官房秘書課企画専門官 7月：国土交通省総合政策局 2003年9月：国土交通省大臣官房付（石原伸晃国土交通大臣秘書官事務取扱） 2004年9月：国土交通省大臣官房総務課企画官 2005年7月：国土交通省大臣官房参事官（国土計画局担当） 2006年8月1日：国土交通省国土計画局大都市圏計画課長 2007年9月26日：国土交通省大臣官房付・内閣官房内閣参事官（内閣総務官室） 2009年7月14日：国土交通省都市・地域整備局まちづくり推進課長 2011年 7月1日：国土交通省都市局まちづくり推進課長 7月8日：国土交通省大臣官房付・東日本大震災復興対策本部事務局参事官・内閣官房復興庁設置準備室参事官 2012年 2月10日：復興庁統括官付参事官（企画班） 9月11日：国土交通省大臣官房参事官（人事担当） 2013年8月1日：国土交通省大臣官房人事課長 2014年1月28日：国土交通省大臣官房審議官（総合政策局、土地・建設産業局担当） 2015年7月31日：国土交通省都市局長 2018年7月31日：国土交通省総合政策局長 2019年7月9日：国土交通審議官 2020年7月21日：国土交通事務次官 2021年7月1日：辞職 2021年12月：東京大学大学院新領域創成科学研究科・ハビタット・イノベーション研究社会連携講座特任教授 脚注 参考文献 国土交通事務次官 国土交通省総合政策局長 国土交通省都市局長 法学士取得者 京都大学出身の人物 大阪府出身の人物 1961年生 存命人物
__label__ja 東部地域(ブークモール：Østlandet/ニーノシュク：Austlandet)はノルウェー南東部の地域。 概要 テレマルク県・ブスケルー県・ヘードマルク県・オップラン県・アーケシュフース県・オスロ・西フォル県・東フォル県の8県から成る。 東部地域はノルウェーで最も人口の多い地域で、首都で最大都市のオスロを含む。 地理 中部地域は北と西を山に囲まれ、東にスウェーデン国境が、南にスカゲラク海峡が有る。 南部地域との境界は曖昧である。 Jotunheimen山脈は2469mに達し、グリーンランドを除く北欧の最高点である。 最北部のDovrefjell山脈と、リレハンメル北東のRondane山脈も重要である。 Hardanger台地は西部地域に繋がっている。 谷が山脈に深く切込んでいる。 主なものは東から西にØsterdal、Gudbrandsdal、Valdres、Hallingdal、Numedalfromが並んでいる。 Østerdalenは平坦な針葉樹の森に囲まれているが、その他は深く山に切り込んでいる。 東部地域の南半分の殆どが松と唐檜属の森に覆われ、谷底で農業が行われている。 オスロ・フィヨルド周辺と北東部は比較的平坦で、農地が点在する。 この平地の人口密度が国内最高で、人口の40%がオスロから200km内に住んでいる。 多くの島が海岸を外海と隔て、夏には水泳やボートの楽園になる。 脚注 ノルウェーの地方区分
__label__ja クラカケモンガラ（鞍掛紋殻、学名：Rhinecanthus verrucosus）は、フグ目・モンガワカワハギ亜目・モンガワカワハギ科の海水魚である。 和名は鞍状斑(鞍のように体側の模様が背中を越えて繋がるもの)があることによる。 形態 体は左右に平い。頭部が大きく目の位置が高いいわゆる馬面をしている。口はいわゆるおちょぼ口だが歯は鋭くサンゴなどもかみ砕く。体色は背部が黄褐色、腹部は白色で黒色の大きな斑がある。頭部の背と腹の境には赤い筋が通る。額から目をとおり胸鰭（ひれ）の付け根にかけて暗色のくさび形の横縞がある。尾柄部には小さな棘が３列に並んでいる。Triggerfishという英名のとおり背鰭の前端に引き金のような大きな棘がある。成魚は30cmほどになる。 分布・生態 太平洋西部やインド洋の熱帯の比較的浅いサンゴ礁の海に生息する。幼魚は黒潮による無効分散(本来生息している海域から潮流などに流されること。環境の違いで定住はできない。)により本州沿岸でも観察されることがある。雑食性で海藻、カニ類、貝類などを食べる。気性が荒く、近い付いてくる人間を追い払おうと体当たりしてくることがある。歯が鋭いので咬まれないように注意が必要である。 関連項目 魚類 魚の一覧 フグ目
__label__ja 『36時間』（36じかん、36 Hours）は、1965年のアメリカ合衆国のサスペンス映画。ロアルド・ダールによる1944年の短編小説「」を基にしている。監督はジョージ・シートン。出演者はジェームズ・ガーナーやエヴァ・マリー・セイント、ロッド・テイラーなど。 撮影のほとんどはヨセミテ国立公園で行われた。 あらすじ ドイツ軍は、リスボンにいた連合軍最高指令部のパイク少佐に麻薬入りのコーヒーを飲ませて捕らえ、連合軍の上陸地点を聞き出そうとする。 パイクは主治医として接触してきたゲルバー軍医少佐から「今は1950年であり、ナチス政権が消滅してから6年たつ。また、あなたは記憶喪失で分からないが、看護師のアンナと2か月前に結婚している」という説明を受ける。パイクはゲルバーにノルマンディーに上陸すると話すが、ゲルバーを失脚させようとしていたシャックはパイクの話を無視し、上陸地はカレーだと確信する。 そのころパイクは指の傷からリスボンにいたことを思い出し、アンナを呼び出して真実を知る。これにより計画は台無しとなり、パイクとアンナは牢屋に入れられる。そこへゲルバーが連合軍がノルマンディーに上陸したという偽りのニュースを2人に話した後、2人を脱獄させ、自らは命を絶つ。2人はスイス領に逃れた一方、2人を追っていたシャックは国境警備隊に殺される。 そして、パイクとアンナは愛し合う。 キャスト ※括弧内は日本語吹替（初回放送1972年5月14日『日曜洋画劇場』） ジェファーソン・パイク少佐：ジェームズ・ガーナー（御木本伸介） アンナ・ヘドラー：エヴァ・マリー・セイント（野口ふみえ） ウォルター・ガーバー軍医少佐：ロッド・テイラー（矢島正明） オットー・シャック：ウェルナー・ピータース（島宇志夫） エルンスト・ファーゼン：ジョン・バナー ピーター・マクリーン大佐：アラン・ネイピア 書記官：ジェームズ・ドゥーアン 脚注 外部リンク 1965年の映画 アメリカ合衆国の戦争映画 イギリスの小説を原作とした映画作品 第二次世界大戦の映画 ドイツを舞台とした映画作品 カリフォルニア州で製作された映画作品 記憶喪失を題材とした映画作品 オーヴァーロード作戦を題材とした映画作品 ディミトリ・ティオムキンの作曲映画 メトロ・ゴールドウィン・メイヤーの作品
__label__ja ジャネス・カースティン（Jannes Kirsten、1993年12月1日 - ）は、プレミアシップエクセター・チーフスに所属するラグビーユニオン選手。 プロフィール 南アフリカ・ヨハネスブルグ出身。 ポジションはロック(LO)、フランカー(FL) 。 身長 197cm、体重 111kg 兄のフリックは元ラグビー選手。 U20南アフリカ代表に選ばれたことがある。 略歴 ブルー・ブルズ、ブルズを経て、2018年、トヨタ自動車ヴェルブリッツ(現・トヨタヴェルブリッツ)に加入。同年11月10日に行われたジャパンラグビートップリーグカップ戦第1節のコカ・コーラレッドスパークス戦に先発出場で日本での公式戦初出場を果たした。 2019年、エクセター・チーフスに加入。 出典 関連項目 U-20ラグビー南アフリカ共和国代表 トヨタヴェルブリッツ ブルズ エクセター・チーフス 外部リンク Exeter Chiefs Jannes Kirsten Ultimate Jannes Kirsten Jannes Kirsten Rugby Union 南アフリカ共和国のラグビーユニオン選手 ブルズの選手 ブルー・ブルズの選手 トヨタヴェルブリッツ及びその前身チームの選手 エクセター・チーフスの選手 ヨハネスブルグ出身の人物 1993年生 存命人物
__label__ja 村上 桂策（むらかみ けいさく、1851年4月25日（嘉永4年3月24日）- 1925年（大正14年）4月18日）は、明治から大正期の地主、政治家。貴族院多額納税者議員。 経歴 伊予国新居郡郷村（愛媛県新居郡神郷村を経て現新居浜市）で、豪農・村上良三郎の長男として生まれる。漢学を修め、早くから政治に関心を持った。1875年（明治8年）7月に家督を相続した。 村会議員を務め、1881年（明治14年）5月、愛媛県会議員補欠選挙で当選し、1884年（明治17年）以降6期連続で務め、1890年（明治23年）8月まで在任した。この間、大同団結運動に加わり、工藤干城らと大同派東予倶楽部を結成して鈴木重遠らと連携した。 1890年、貴族院多額納税者議員に互選され、同年9月29日から1897年（明治30年）9月28日まで在任した。 脚注 注釈 出典 参考文献 人事興信所編『人事興信録 第3版』人事興信所、1911年。 『愛媛県百科大事典』下、愛媛新聞社、1985年。 『愛媛県史 人物』愛媛県史編纂委員会、1989年。 衆議院・参議院編『議会制度百年史 - 貴族院・参議院議員名鑑』大蔵省印刷局、1990年。 愛媛県選出の貴族院多額納税者議員 明治時代の貴族院議員 愛媛県の市町村議会議員 愛媛県議会議員 日本の地主 自由民権運動の人物 愛媛県出身の人物 伊予国の人物 1851年生 1925年没
__label__ja 会津本郷焼（あいづほんごうやき）とは、福島県大沼郡旧会津本郷町（現在は会津美里町の一部）周辺を産地とする陶器及び陶磁器である（会津若松市に所在する窯元もある）。会津本郷せと市が毎年8月第一日曜日に開かれている。 歴史 豊臣政権下で会津地方の領主となった蒲生氏郷が1593年、播磨国から瓦工を呼んで鶴ヶ城の屋根瓦を製造させたのが始まりである。江戸時代前期の1645年、会津藩主の保科正之の求めに応じて尾張国瀬戸から陶工・水野源左衛門が招かれ、本郷村で陶土を発見して本格的に焼き物の基礎を築いた。1800年には、藩命で有田に潜入して技術を学んだ佐藤伊兵衛が本郷村の大久保陶石を使って磁器づくりにも成功。現在の会津本郷焼の原型が完成する。水野は「陶祖」、佐藤は「磁祖」として、9月16日の陶祖祭で遺徳を偲んでいる。 幕末の戊辰戦争で会津も戦場となり（会津戦争）、作陶も大打撃を受けたが復興。明治時代には「会津本郷焼」の呼称も定まり、輸出も行われた。 花瓶のほか土瓶、皿などの食器、急須、マグカップ、箸置き、香合など様々な製品がつくられている。1993年には通商産業省から伝統的工芸品産地として指定されている。2021年には地域団体商標にも登録された。明治の最盛期には窯元が100を超えたが、2021年時点では13である。 特徴 陶石を原料に使う磁器産地としては関東以北で唯一である。大久保陶石は風雨に1年以上さらした上で砕いて、粘土として練り上げる手間をかける。厚手で丈夫な仕上がりで知られる。色合いは用途により様々である。 会津本郷焼で使われる釉薬に「飴釉」がある。飴釉は文字通り飴色で光沢を持っている。この飴釉を使った代表的な陶器が「にしん鉢」で古くからにしんの山椒漬け専用として使われてきた。また、磁器を製作している窯元も多いが、とりわけ保科正之が弓隊を配して開拓させた集落地である御弓新田（現在の会津美里町新町）唯一の磁器の窯元となった佐竹富太郎の次男富三郎が明治5年に分家して富三窯を開窯。4代目富三は、日本原産の花椿をモチーフにし、染付の技術・技法とともに会津焼の伝統を現代に生かすデザインを創案した。 出典 関連項目 陶磁器 民藝運動 赤べこ 起き上がり小法師 外部リンク 会津本郷焼公式サイト 会津美里町-本業焼窯元マップ 日本のやきもの/会津本郷焼-日本セラミックス協会 日本の陶芸 経済産業大臣指定伝統的工芸品 地域団体商標 会津美里町 福島県の文化
__label__ja ジュニオール・カバナンガ・カロンジ（Junior Kabananga Kalonji 、1989年4月4日 - ）は、コンゴ民主共和国・キンシャサ出身のプロサッカー選手。コンゴ民主共和国代表。FCシャフティオール・ソリゴルスク所属。ポジションは、フォワード。 クラブ経歴 2010-11シーズンよりRSCアンデルレヒトに加入。2011年1月、KベールスホットACにレンタル移籍。2012–13シーズンはKSVルーセラーレにレンタル移籍。 2013年7月、サークル・ブルッヘに2年契約で完全移籍。 2015年6月、FCアスタナと2年半契約を結んだ。2016年2月1日、シーズン終了までの契約でカルデミル・カラビュックスポルにレンタル移籍することが発表された。 代表歴 ゴール タイトル FCアスタナ カザフスタン・プレミアリーグ (4): 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018 カザフスタン・クボグィ (1): 2016 カザフスタン・スペルクボグィ (1): 2019 個人 アフリカネイションズカップ2017得点王 脚注 コンゴ民主共和国のサッカー選手 サッカーコンゴ民主共和国代表選手 KベールスホットACの選手 RSCアンデルレヒトの選手 KSVルーセラーレの選手 サークル・ブルッヘの選手 FCアスタナの選手 カルデミル・カラビュックスポルの選手 カタールSCの選手 FCシャフティオール・ソリゴルスクの選手 1989年生 存命人物 キンシャサ出身の人物
__label__ja 門倉岬（かどくらみさき）は、種子島の最南端にある岬である。 門倉岬から喜界島を結び、屋久島望む右側（西側）が東シナ海で、左側（東側）が太平洋である。 それまで、1702年（元禄15年）大隅国の「元禄国絵図」によれば「熊毛埼」と記述されている。 岬の先端部から太平洋側（東側）は、竹崎の種子島宇宙センター「宇宙科学技術館」まで1２キロに渡る砂浜で、「前之浜自然公園」がある形成している。岬の先端部から東シナ海側（西側）は、屋久島が見渡せる景勝地となっている。岬の先端部は海食により、高さ約50メートルの断崖となっている。公園内に「鉄砲伝来紀功碑」や御崎（みさき）神社があり、南蛮船の形状を模した展望台や遊歩道が整備されている。 2009年には門倉岬で皆既日食を観測するツアーが組まれた。 鉄砲伝来紀功碑 1921年（大正10年）1月建立。 題字は種子島守時（1879年 - 1929年、種子島氏第27代当主）、碑文は西村天囚の撰。 天文12年(1543)8月25日、西村（にしのむら）の小浦（現在の前之浜）に漂着した明国船に乗船していたポルトガル人によって、日本に火縄銃が伝えられたことを記す。 御崎神社 岬の南端、断崖の側にある神社。大国主尊、彦火々出見尊を祭神とする。岬の形状が動物の尻尾を思わせることから、近世には「島尾大明神」と呼ばれた。 『種子島家御家年中行事属類雑記』の神社縁起には、「往古は潮風災害よけの守護神として島尾大明神と称し、祭礼は9月19日、神領として山神祭りの田があったが、今は百姓地で御倉入れ地となっている。祭礼の時は、村中で奉仕して白酒を造り、本国寺で満山祈祷をやり、村役以下村中の老若みな大明神に参宮し、国土安穏の古例の踊りを社殿の庭で催す」とある。 交通 南種子町コミュニティバス 西之線 門倉岬下車 種子島空港からタクシーで30分 関連項目 南種子町 鉄砲伝来 鉄炮記 - 1606年『南浦文集』の上巻に所収 脚注 参考文献 鐡炮記 1606年（南浦文集に撰録） 九州地方の岬 鹿児島県の地形 南種子町 太平洋の岬
__label__ja アジア・アフリカ語学院（あじあ・あふりかごがくいん）は、日本の主にアジア、アフリカ言語の専門学校。1961年創立。アジア・アフリカ文化財団の事業として付設されている。中国語や韓国(朝鮮)語、タイ語などアジアの主要言語の他、ヒンディー語やモンゴル語、アフリカのスワヒリ語なども学べる。2011年に創立50周年を迎えた。 設置学科 専門課程 日本語教育学科（2年制） 韓国語学科（1年制） インド語学科（1年制） 日本語学科（留学生向け） ※その他生涯教育、法人向け語学研修 所在地 東京都三鷹市新川5-14-16 建物2階には同財団が運営するアジア・アフリカ図書館が併設されている。 建物1階にはパートナーシップ協定を結んだ「三鷹市立図書館南部図書館みんなみ」が併設され、郭沫若文庫の一部資料が展示コーナーで公開されている。 著名な教員 関根謙司 西江雅之 長弘毅 出身者 菊池弥生 脚注 関連項目 郭沫若（同校図書館に「郭沫若文庫」を併設） 外部リンク アジア・アフリカ語学院 （公財）アジア・アフリカ文化財団 アジア・アフリカ図書館（東京都） / Asia-Africa Library (Tokyo) | アジア諸国の情報をさがす | 国立国会図書館 トップページ(簡易検索)：アジア・アフリカ図書館 外国語学校 東京都の私立学校 学校記事
__label__ja 企業組合建築環境システム（きぎょうくみあいけんちくかんきょうしすてむ、）は、日本の愛知県豊橋市に本部・三河事務所に置く、一般社団法人日本設備設計事務所協会連合会、一般社団法人愛知県設備設計監理協会に加入する建築設備設計事務所。 旧名称は企業組合設備企画（きぎょうくみあいせつびきかく）。 本部・三河事務所のほか、愛知県名古屋市中村区、静岡県静岡市葵区、岐阜県岐阜市に事務所を置く。 概要 東海3県にある建築・建築設備、設計・監理業務を行っている一級建築士事務所。 企業組合とは事業者、勤労者、主婦、学生など個人の方々(4人以上）が組合員となって資本と労働を持ち寄り、自らの働く場を創造するための組織である。 また、組合自体がそれぞれの有するアイデアや技能、技術などを活かした事業を会社と同じように法人格を有する一個の事業体として実施する組織であり、個人が集まって創業するための組織。 沿革 1975年（昭和50年） - 愛知県豊橋市にて近藤直幸設備事務所を開設。 1982年（昭和57年） - 組織変更に伴い企業組合設備企画を設立。 1984年（昭和59年）- 官公需適格組合証明取得・官公需業種別受注対策事業対象組合に決定 1995年（平成7年） - 愛知県豊橋市仁連木町に本部を新築。 1997年（平成９年） - 愛知県名古屋市中村区に尾張事務所を開設。 2005年（平成17年） - 企業組合建築環境システムに組合名変更。 2008年（平成20年）- 愛知県名古屋市中村区に名古屋事務所を新築。 2010年（平成22年）- 静岡県静岡市葵区に静岡事務所、岐阜県岐阜市に岐阜事務所を開設。 加入団体 一般社団法人日本設備設計事務所協会連合会 一般社団法人愛知県設備設計監理協会 一般社団法人建築設備技術者協会中部支部 全国中小企業団体中央会 愛知県中小企業団体中央会 一般社団法人東三河kid's未来クラブ サポートチーム 三遠ネオフェニックス 名古屋オーシャンズ 外部リンク 企業組合建築環境システム 企業組合建築環境システムfacebook 企業組合建築環境システム名古屋事務所facebook 企業組合建築環境システムLinkedIn 企業組合建築環境システムTwittwr__インデックス__ 企業組合 建築設備 建築設計事務所 1982年設立の組織 豊橋市
__label__ja メケンニル（Meka'enile）は、エリトリア・セメナウィ・ケイバハリ地方南部の村で、ブリ半島西部にありズラ湾に面した海岸線を持つ。ゲレーロ地区に属する。メケンニルは他にMacannile,Macalille,Macanilleとも綴られる。また、メケンヴィルと呼ばれることもあり、その場合Macanvilleと綴られる。北緯15度17分0秒、東経39度48分0秒。標高1m。 脚注 関連項目 エリトリア関係記事の一覧 エリトリアの都市 セメナウィ・ケイバハリ地方
__label__ja 餓鬼憑き（がきつき）は、日本各地に伝わる憑き物。人間が餓鬼に取り憑かれ、激しい空腹感に襲われることをいう。 概要 餓鬼に憑かれるのは主に山道を歩いているときなどとされ、憑かれると身動きが取れなくなってしまい、歩いている最中だった場合は一歩も前へ進めなくなってしまう。 神奈川県のヤビツ峠では、合戦で餓死した兵の亡霊が餓鬼となってさまよい、食物をあさっている為、峠越えをする旅人は急に空腹となり、歩行困難に陥いるため、食物を峠に供えて越えなければならないとされている。 餓鬼憑きに遭った場合には食べ物を口に入れることで逃れられるとされる。和歌山県の北部ではこの食べ物は一粒だけの米でも良いとされ、それすら持ち合わせがないときには「米」という字を掌に書いて嘗めることでも良いという。また高知県の土佐清水地方でも餓鬼飯といって、餓鬼憑きに備えて弁当の中身を一口ほど残す慣わしがある。新潟県では餓鬼憑きで空腹に襲われた者にすぐに食べ物を与えることは良くないといい、粥、雑炊、味噌汁などの軽めの食事を出すという。 前もって餓鬼憑きを避けるための方法も伝わっている。和歌山北部では、山中で弁当を食べるときには、その中身の一口分だけを周囲に撒くと餓鬼憑きに遭わないという。 なお餓鬼とは、本来は仏教における餓鬼道の亡者を指し、仏教説話集である『因果物語』にも、『慳貪者、生きながら餓鬼の報いを受くる事』と題して、餓鬼道の霊が人に取り憑く話が語られているが、民間の伝承における餓鬼憑きの餓鬼とは、一般的には行き倒れになった者や餓死者の怨霊のことを指している。 西日本に広く伝承される憑き物・ひだる神も、餓鬼憑きの類として知られる。 類似する憑き物 磯餓鬼（いそがき） 伊豆諸島の利島の海岸に現れるという餓鬼憑き。海に出た人がこれに憑依されると、急激に空腹に襲われて倒れてしまう。海に出るとき、芋などの食べ物を携帯しておくと、この怪を避けられるという。 ジキトリ 愛媛県の宇和地方に伝わる餓鬼憑き。憑かれた際には僅かの食料でも口に入れると逃れられるので、前もって弁当の中身を数粒の飯でも良いので残しておくと良いという。 ナエガツク 福岡県遠賀郡岡垣村波津（現・岡垣町）の憑き物。海で水死体を見るとこれに憑かれ、急に腹が減ってしまうという。これに憑かれた男が、家に帰って5人前の飯を平らげたという話もある。 脚注 参考文献 関連項目 ハンガーノック 憑き物
__label__ja 南港中出入口（なんこうなかでいりぐち）は、大阪府大阪市住之江区の阪神高速道路4号湾岸線の出入口。神戸・大阪市内（天保山）方面のみ出入口のあるハーフICである。りんくう（泉佐野）方面に向かう場合は南港南出入口（南港南料金所）を利用する。南港北 - 三宝間開通時には未供用であったが、1999年に追加設置された。 道路 阪神高速4号湾岸線(4-24) 料金所 南港中料金所 ブース数：2 ETC専用：1 ETC/一般：1 周辺 大阪南港トラックターミナル 大阪南港フェリーターミナル・フェリーターミナル駅 かもめフェリーターミナル 隣 阪神高速4号湾岸線 (4-02)南港北出入口 - (4-24)南港中出入口 - (4-03)南港南出入口 備考 阪神高速5号湾岸線から合流して南港中出口に向かう場合、車線変更が可能となってから出口まで約500mの間に、右車線から中央車線を超えて左車線へ移る必要があるので注意が必要。 脚注 関連項目 南港 日本のインターチェンジ一覧 外部リンク 阪神高速道路株式会社 んこうなか なんこうなか 住之江区の交通 1982年開業の道路施設
__label__ja インスタント機能（インスタントきのう）とは、パーソナルコンピュータにおいて、電源オフの状態から、WindowsなどのOS起動処理を行なわず、即時にテレビ視聴などの処理を行なえる機能。メーカーによって、インスタントモード、INSTANT PLAY（インスタント プレイ）、インスタントオンなどとも呼ばれる。 機能例 一般的には、音楽CDやDVDの再生、TVチューナーの利用などのマルチメディア再生のほか、メールの確認やブラウジングをOSを起動させずに実現する。 この機能を持つパソコンでは、家電同様のリモコンが添付されることも多く、据置きモデルではキーボードやマウスもコードレスになっていることがある。 歴史 2005年頃から、TV機能などの使い勝手向上を期して、ノートパソコンを中心に導入され始めた。 2006年現在数社のノートパソコンがこの機能を備えている。そのほか据置きのパソコンや自作向けのベアボーンキットにも採用例がある。 実現手段 これらの組み込みマルチメディア機能には、多くの場合組み込みシステム用のオペレーティングシステムが利用されており、広義のマルチブートシステムとも考えられる。 利用されるOSとしては、Linux、Windows Embeddedなどが挙げられる。 脚注 注釈 出典 いんすたんときのう
__label__ja 山口 稲床（やまぐち の いなとこ）は、平安時代前期の貴族。姓は宿禰。官位は従五位下・豊後介。 経歴 仁明朝において春宮坊大属として春宮・恒貞親王に仕えるが、承和9年（842年）承和の変が発生して恒貞親王が春宮を廃されると、稲床も連座して安房権目に左遷された。承和14年（847年）承和の変で罰せられた者に対して入京が許されており、稲床もこれに従って入京したか。 文徳朝の仁寿4年（854年）外従五位下・豊後介に叙任される。豊後介在任中には、同国守・石川宗継が百姓の財物を不法に奪ったことについて、朝廷に対して証明を行っている。 清和朝の貞観9年（867年）内位の従五位下に至る。 官歴 『六国史』による。 時期不詳：正六位上・春宮坊大属 承和9年（842年） 7月26日：安房権目（承和の変） 承和14年（847年） 2月10日：令入京 仁寿4年（854年） 正月7日：外従五位下。正月16日：豊後介 貞観9年（867年） 正月7日：従五位下（内位） 脚注 参考文献 森田悌『続日本後紀 （下）』講談社〈講談社学術文庫〉、2010年 武田祐吉、佐藤謙三訳『読み下し 日本三代実録 上巻』戎光祥出版、2009年 平安時代前期の貴族 9世紀没
__label__ja 『津田大介 日本にプラス』（つだ・だいすけ にほんにプラス）は2014年4月から、テレ朝チャンネル2で放送されている報道トーク番組である。 2014年2月をもって、新作の放送・制作を終了した同趣旨の『ニュースの深層』をリニューアルした形でスタートしたもので、インターネットなどのソーシャルメディア評論家の第一人者として知られる津田大介が、国内外を問わず様々な世相や社会の動きに着目し、「日本にとってプラスになるようなアイデア」を討論や対談を通して提言していこうとするものである。 放送日 初回放送 原則として隔週で月-木曜日20:00-21:00（ただし、プロ野球中継などにより放送できない場合は当日23:10-翌日0:10<=当日24:10>に時間を変更） その他随時再放送を実施 出演 津田大介 下平さやか（テレビ朝日） 渋谷和宏（経済評論家、作家、元雑誌編集者） 番組構成 ゲストトークコーナー（メイン） tsudaのニュースピックアップ（最近のニュースの中から、特に話題になっているテーマについて津田がじっくりと解説する） 今週の「ゼゼヒヒ」（津田自らの公式サイトで、様々な論争をテーマにしたアンケート「インターネット国民投票・今週のゼゼヒヒ」からピックアップしてそこに寄せられた意見を紹介する） わかりやすい経済（渋谷の持ちコーナー。「いまさら聞けない経済用語、経済ニュースの読み方」を解説） tsudaのイチオシ（書評。最近発売された最新の書籍・DVD・CDなどから、津田が特に興味を持った作品を毎回数作品紹介して、その見どころを解説するもの） シリーズもの 変わる日本の企業地図 マンガの巨人 経済界の叡智に聞く 検証!この国の問題 外部リンク 津田大介 日本にプラス（番組サイト） 同番組放送日程一覧 テレ朝チャンネル テレビ朝日のトーク番組 テレビ朝日の情報・ワイドショー番組 テレビ朝日のニュース・報道番組 テレビ朝日の教養番組 2014年のテレビ番組 (日本)
__label__ja アルギッパイオイ（ギリシャ語：Ἀργιππαῖοι）は、古代ギリシア時代にウラル山脈の麓に住んでいたとされる民族。生まれながら（薄毛の遺伝、あるいは髪を剃る習俗から？）彼らはみな禿頭であるため、禿頭族と呼ばれた。 ヘロドトスの記録 古代ギリシャの歴史家ヘロドトスは『ヒストリアイ（歴史）』において次のように記している。 言語系統 ヘロドトスは「独自の言語を話す」と記しており、少なくともスキタイ語ではないと考えられる。バシュキル語やカルムイク語の言語系統はアルタイ系のテュルク系であるので、仮にスキタイ語がインド・イラン語派（インド・ヨーロッパ語族のうちの語派のひとつ）であるならばこの記述に矛盾は生じない。スキタイ周辺の民族の中で、スキタイと異なる言語を話すのは他にアンドロパゴイが挙げられる。 注釈 出典 脚注 参照資料 関連項目 アガテュルソイ アンドロパゴイ イッセドネス人 キンメリア人 サウロマタイ サカ サルマタイ スキタイ タウロイ ネウロイ ブディノイ マッサゲタイ メランクライノイ 中央ユーラシア史の民族 スキタイ
__label__ja ゲロノイ（ギリシャ語：Γελωνῶν）は、古代ギリシャ時代の歴史に記されたヨーロッパ・ロシア地方のギリシア系農耕民族。現在のロシア連邦・沿ヴォルガ連邦管区あたりにいたと思われる。 歴史 起源 古代ギリシャの歴史家ヘロドトスは『ヒストリアイ（歴史）』において次の伝説を挙げている。 この国を追われたゲロノスこそがゲロノイの始祖であるとされる。しかし、ゲロノイはもともとギリシア人なので（後述）、これはあくまで伝説である。 ダレイオス1世のスキタイ征伐 アケメネス朝のダレイオス1世（在位：前522年 - 前486年）はボスポラス海峡を渡ってトラキア人を征服すると、続いて北のスキタイを征服するべく、イストロス河を渡った。これを聞いたスキタイは周辺の諸民族を糾合してダレイオスに当たるべきだと考え、周辺諸族に使者を送ったが、すでにタウロイ，アガテュルソイ，ネウロイ，アンドロパゴイ，メランクライノイ，ゲロノイ，ブディノイ，サウロマタイの諸族の王は会合し、対策を練っていた。スキタイの使者は「諸族が一致団結してペルシアに当たるため、スキタイに協力してほしい」と要請した。しかし、諸族の意見は二手に分かれ、スキタイに賛同したのはゲロノイ王，ブディノイ王，サウロマタイ王のみであり、アガテュルソイらその他の諸族は「スキタイの言うことは信用できない」とし、協力を断った。 この戦いでゲロノイはブディノイとともにスキタイ二区連合部隊（イダンテュルソス王，タクサキス王の部隊）に属し、最後はスキタイ，ブディノイ，サウロマタイと共にペルシア軍をイストロス河の向こうへ追い出すことに成功し、勝利を収めた。 習俗 以上のようにゲロノイはギリシア系の農耕民で、スキタイ系遊牧民であるブディノイとともに暮らし、ギリシア語とスキタイ語のバイリンガルでもあった。 脚注 参考資料 （ヘロドトス『歴史』）訳：松平千秋『ヘロドトス』（筑摩書房、1988年、ISBN 4480203109） 関連項目 アガテュルソイ アルギッパイオイ アンドロパゴイ イッセドネス人 キンメリア人 ゲタイ サウロマタイ サカ サルマタイ スキタイ ダアイ タウロイ ネウロイ マッサゲタイ メランクライノイ スキタイ語 古代ギリシア語 遊牧民 中央ユーラシア史の民族 スキタイ
__label__ja YELL FROM NIPPON（エール フロム ニッポン）は、2006FIFAワールドカップの開催をきっかけに「サッカーボールをアフリカ・エリトリア国をはじめとした世界中の子供たちに届けよう」というテーマで、ジャンルを超えた様々な人たちが1曲を歌い継ぐというプロジェクト。 浜崎貴司を中心に2006年5月にリリースされたシングル「友情のエール」の売り上げ金は、サッカーボール購入費、運搬資金などに使われた。同年8月、YELL FROM NIPPON代表として浜崎貴司が購入したサッカーボールを届けにアフリカ・エリトリアに渡った。 作品 シングル『友情のエール』2006年5月31日（Victor Sweetsterレーベル） 作詞：浜崎貴司 作曲：浜崎貴司、本間昭光 編曲：本間昭光 音楽プロデュース：浜崎貴司、本間昭光 ジャケットデザイン：日比野克彦 参加アーティスト 飯田高広 石井竜也 忌野清志郎 ウルトラス MCU MOMO-MC 大黒摩季 辛島美登里 carezza 伊藤俊吾（キンモクセイ） 小泉今日子 松本素生、中澤寛規（GOING UNDER GROUND） 斉藤和義 坂井真紀 﨑山龍男（スピッツ） 佐藤タイジ（THEATRE BROOK） 佐野史郎 椎名純平 白石美帆 Diggy-MO'（SOUL'd OUT） 竹中直人 谷原章介 トータス松本（ウルフルズ） NAOTO 浜崎貴司 BOSE（スチャダラパー） 一十三十一 本間昭光 前田啓介（レミオロメン） 南佳孝 MOOMIN MEGUMI YO-KING 吉岡美穂 楽器などの担当 Drums：﨑山龍男（スピッツ） Bass：前田啓介（レミオロメン） Electric Guitar：佐藤タイジ（THEATRE BROOK） Acostic Guitar：佐野史郎・浜崎貴司 All other Instrumental：本間昭光(ポルノグラフィティのプロデューサー) Synthsist：飯田高広 Violin：NAOTO Other Words & Music：MCU、Diggy-MO'、MOOMIN、BOSE 関連サイト Sweetstarレーベル YELL FROM NIPPON 音楽プロジェクト 日本の音楽グループ ビクターエンタテインメントのアーティスト 2006年のアフリカ 10人組以上の音楽グループ 贈与
__label__ja 金本位制復帰論争（きんほんいせいふっきろんそう）は、1925年、イギリスにおいて金本位制を復活させるかどうかについて、時の蔵相ウィンストン・チャーチルと経済学者ジョン・メイナード・ケインズによって繰り広げられた論争である。同時代の日本での同様の論争については金解禁を参照のこと。 概要 戦前平価での金本位制に反対したケインズは、『チャーチル氏の経済的帰結』を発表し、チャーチルを批判した。 結果 1929年に起きた世界恐慌により、イギリスでは、1931年に金本位制が停止された。1936年にケインズは『雇用・利子および貨幣の一般理論』を出版した。 関連項目 金本位制 ウィンストン・チャーチル ジョン・メイナード・ケインズ 通貨制度 経済思想の歴史 1920年代の経済 金 金本位制 議論と対立 1925年のイギリス ウィンストン・チャーチル ジョン・メイナード・ケインズ
__label__ja 『ねなしぐさ 平賀源内の殺人』（ねなしぐさひらがげんないのさつじん）は、乾緑郎による日本の時代小説、ミステリー小説。「このミステリーがすごい!」で大賞を受賞した乾が、「歴史の謎」をテーマに描いた作品。 ストーリー 登場人物 平賀源内 侍であり、本業は本草学者。医学、蘭学や鉱物の知識、戯作者、発明家といった多岐にわたる。 杉田玄白 平賀源内の友人。 田沼意次 老中。 工藤平助 医者。 志乃 源内を慕っている遊女。 作風 品川庄司の品川祐によると、悲しい平賀源内の最期が報われる気がするように描かれている。 宮部みゆきは2020年4月19日付の読売新聞で、本作について平賀源内の「史実を鵜呑みにしていいのか、磊落な天才の人生の行き着く先に、他の希望の道はなかったのだろうかと問いかける」ような作品であると評している。 書誌情報 乾緑郎『ねなしぐさ 平賀源内の殺人』2020年2月10日発売、 文庫版、2022年6月7日発売、 出典 時代小説 2020年の小説
__label__ja エアウォーク（airwalk）はビル・マンとジョージ・ヨーンによって1986年に作られた、ペンシルベニア州のアルツーナに本拠地があるサーフィンやスケートボード、BMXなどのシューズを製造しているメーカー。1980年代～90年代初頭にはスケートボードシューズやTシャツ、スノーボードなどを製造していた。また、ジェイソン・リーやトニー・ホークなどのスケーターのサポートをしていた。 1990年代中ごろにビル・マンがエアウォークを去り、会社はメインストリームに方向性を変えることになる。それにより、スケーター・カルチャーを定着させていく重要な会社となっていった。スノーボードやアパレルに力を入れる一方、1999年には夏のXゲームでエアウォークがサポートするバッキー・ラスク、アンディ・マクドナルド、ブライアン・フォスター、ジェイ・ミロン、デニス・デラメラエレといったプロ・スケーターたちが3つの金メダル、4つの銀メダルを獲得し、スケートボードブランドとしての力も見せている。 2004年1月、コレクティヴ・ライセンシング・インターナショナルに買収される。彼らはエアウォークというブランドが本来あった若い世代をターゲットとしたアクションスポーツブランドとして再出発を図ることにし、シムス・スノーボードやヴィジョン・ストリート・ウェアをさらに買収、新たなブランドイメージの打ち出しをしていくこととなった。 2007年3月、コレクティヴ・ライセンシング・インターナショナルは、コレクティブブランズの傘下グループとなる。これにより、サッカニー、チャンピオン（シューズ）、スペリー トップサイダーなどと同じ会社のブランドとなった。エアウォークブランドはコレクティヴ・ライセンシング・インターナショナルでも管理している模様。 外部リンク AIRWALK（日本語） アメリカ合衆国のスポーツ用品メーカー スケートボード用品メーカー サーフィン 靴のブランド
__label__ja シグマ アルドリッチ ジャパン合同会社（）は、東京都目黒区に本社を置く試薬の製造販売会社。 シグマ アルドリッチ（）の日本法人である。 沿革 1978年 - アルドリッチ･ジャパン･インクとして設立 1994年 - 千葉県市川市に物流センターを開設。スペルコ買収に伴い､アルドリッチ･ジャパン･インクとスペルコ･ジャパンを統合し、シグマ･アルドリッチジャパン株式会社(SAJ)を設立 1997年 - 大阪営業所を新大阪西浦ビルに移転 1999年 - 本社を東日本橋スカイビルに移転 2003年 - 本社を天王洲セントラルタワービルに移転 2004年 - 事業統合により、シグマジェノシスジャパン株式会社を、シグマ アルドリッチ ジャパン株式会社ジェノシス事業部とする。 2012年 - シグマ アルドリッチ ジャパン合同会社に組織変更 2015年 - 独メルクの傘下となる。 事業所 営業所 大阪営業所 大阪市淀川区西宮原2-7-38新大阪西浦ビル 物流センター 市川物流センター 千葉県市川市大町368 事業所 石狩事業所 - オリゴDNA、RNA、ペプチド、抗体の受託生産 北海道石狩市新港西1丁目777-13 関連会社 シグマ アルドリッチ メルク (ドイツ) メルクミリポア 外部リンク シグマ アルドリッチ ジャパン合同会社 試薬メーカー 日本の化学工業メーカー 目黒区の企業 1978年設立の企業 合同会社
__label__ja 斎藤 澄子（さいとう すみこ、1972年3月26日 - ）は、日本の元女子プロレスラー。福島県会津若松市 出身。 経歴・戦歴 1989年にジャパン女子プロレス入門、翌1990年11月1日、大阪府立体育会館第二競技場大会での小屋百合子戦でデビュー。 1992年にジャパン女子が解散すると、JWP女子プロレスの旗揚げに参加。同期の福岡晶とライバル関係を築くが、首を負傷したため1993年2月11日、福岡とのシングルマッチで引退。 1995年結婚。 2009年11月2日、同期のGAMIの20周年記念興行『GAMILIBRE5〜GAMI CHRONICLE〜』（プロレスリングWAVE）のメインイベントで一夜限りの現役復帰。 得意技 STF 入場曲 「Believe in You」 関連項目 プロレスラー一覧 脚注 日本の女子プロレスラー ジャパン女子プロレスに所属したプロレスラー JWPに所属したプロレスラー 1972年生 存命人物
__label__ja 国道130号（こくどう130ごう）は、東京港から東京都港区芝一丁目に至る一般国道である。総延長が日本で2番目に短い国道である。 概要 東京都港区内にある東京港の日の出桟橋付近から、西の旧海岸通りを経て、芝四丁目交差点で国道15号とを結ぶ一般国道の路線で、いわゆる港国道のひとつ。日本の一般国道としては、総延長で2番目、実延長で日本で3番目に短い路線である。東京港とされる起点は、東京税関芝浦出張所から至近にある、ゆりかもめ東京臨海新交通臨海線の高架下の東京都道481号新橋日の出ふ頭線との交点にあり、晴海ふ頭や豊洲ふ頭からは港湾を挟んで西に位置する。 東京都による都市計画路線名は「東京都市計画道路幹線街路補助線街路第196号線」である。 路線データ 一般国道の路線を指定する政令に基づく起終点および経過地は次のとおり。 起点：東京港 終点：東京都港区芝一丁目（芝四丁目交差点 = 国道15号交点） 重要な経過地：なし 総延長 : 0.5 km 重用延長 : なし 未供用延長 : なし 実延長 : 0.5 km 現道 : 0.5 km 旧道 : なし 新道 : なし 指定区間：なし 短距離国道 総延長の順位（短距離として） 国道174号：187.1 m（日本一短距離の国道） 国道130号：482 m 国道198号：618.1 m 実延長の順位（短距離として） 国道174号：187.1 m（日本一短距離の国道） 国道189号：372 m 国道130号：482 m 歴史 1953年（昭和28年）5月18日 - 二級国道130号東京港線（東京港 - 東京都港区本芝町）として指定施行。 1965年（昭和40年）4月1日 - 道路法改正により一級・二級区分が廃止されて一般国道130号として指定施行。 路線状況 通称 旧海岸通り 道路施設 橋梁 南浜橋（港区） 地理 起点付近は、日の出桟橋や芝浦ふ頭に近い位置にあり、近くにあるレインボーブリッジを眼前に見ることができる。フェリーターミナルがある有明ふ頭までは離れており、台場や東京港の港湾を挟んで国道は北に位置する。 通過する自治体 東京都 港区 交差する道路 脚注 注釈 出典 参考文献 関連項目 日本の一般国道一覧 関東地方の道路一覧 外部リンク 東京都 第一建設事務所：全線を管理 国道130号の位置（Yahoo!地図情報） 130 東京都の道路
__label__ja ルーニー・バルドグジ（Roony Bardghji, 2005年11月15日 - ）は、スウェーデンのサッカー選手。クウェート市出身。デンマーク・スーペルリーガ・FCコペンハーゲン所属。ポジションはMF。 クラブ経歴 ローデビーAIFなどのユースチームを渡り歩いた後、2019年にマルメFFのユースアカデミーに入所。15歳の誕生日を迎えた2020年11月15日にFCコペンハーゲンと契約。16歳を迎えた2021年11月にトップチームに昇格。誕生日から1週間後の同月22日のオーフスGF戦で先発で起用されプロデビュー。同月29日のオールボーBK戦では、前半31分に勝ち越しとなるプロ初ゴールを決め、試合も3-1で勝利した。 代表経歴 プロデビュー前の2021年からユース世代のスウェーデン代表に招集されている。 脚注 外部リンク スウェーデンのサッカー選手 FCコペンハーゲンの選手 シリア系スウェーデン人 帰化スウェーデン人のサッカー選手 クウェート市出身の人物 2005年生 存命人物
__label__ja ルートヴィヒ・シュトライヒャー（Ludwig Streicher, 1920年6月26日 - 2003年3月13日）は、オーストリアのウィーン生まれのコントラバス奏者。ウィーン・フィルハーモニー管弦楽団の首席奏者やソリストとしての活動のみならず、教育者としても知られ、著書『コントラバス教本』は日本でもコントラバスを学ぶものの間でよく知られている。 略歴 14歳でウィーン音楽アカデミーに入学、1940年に卒業後、1944年までポーランドのクラクフ国立劇場の首席奏者を務める。1945年にウィーン・フィルハーモニー管弦楽団に入団、1954年から1973年までは首席奏者を務めた。1966年以降は、ウィーン音楽演劇アカデミーの教授として後進の指導にあたった。 ウィーン・フィル退団後はソリストとしてコントラバス作品の紹介に努め、独奏楽器としてのコントラバスの表現力や奏法を高めることに貢献した。ソリストとしては、18世紀のディッタースドルフから現代の音楽に至るまで、コントラバスのオリジナル作品を録音している。 書籍 『コントラバス奏法』（上・下） 長谷川悟 訳 音楽之友社 ISBN 4-27647-781-6 / ISBN 4-27647-782-4 脚注 オーストリアのコントラバス奏者 ウィーン・フィルハーモニー管弦楽団の奏者 ウィーン国立音楽大学出身の人物 ウィーン出身の人物 1920年生 2003年没
__label__ja 三条八幡宮（さんじょうはちまんぐう）は、新潟県三条市の神社。 歴史 885年（仁和元年）に創建された。石清水八幡宮から分霊を勧請し神社を創建した。元々は現在の大崎山公園に位置していたが、1599年（慶長4年）に現在地に移転した。 毎年1月14日夜から15日明け方にかけて挙行される「献灯祭」は三条市の冬の風物詩である。氏子から献納される巨大な御神灯を灯すことで、幸せな前途を照らすとされている。 文化財 大太刀（銘信国）（新潟県指定文化財 昭和31年3月23日指定） 交通アクセス 北三条駅より徒歩7分。 脚注 参考文献 新潟県の歴史散歩編集委員会 編『新潟県の歴史散歩（歴史散歩15）』山川出版社、2009年 新潟県の神社 三条市の歴史 三条市の建築物 新潟県の旧郷社 八幡宮 神功皇后を祭神とした神社
__label__ja 『オーイシ・えなこの夜の××』（オーイシ・えなこのよるのペケペケ）はテレビ神奈川（tvk）で放送されていたバラエティ番組。 概要 オーイシマサヨシとえなこが夜の情報番組をコンセプトに、2人がコスプレをして職業体験をする企画や、体を動かす体操企画などさまざまな情報を紹介する番組である。 2021年7月21日には、番組がBS11でも放送されることが、公式Twitterにて発表され、28日にYouTubeチャンネルが開設された。YouTubeには、番組の一部や、期間限定での番組の見逃し配信などが投稿される。 コーナー 職業体験企画 オーイシマサヨシとえなこがコスプレをして職業を体験する企画。YouTube限定で公開された番組第0話でのえなこの発言によりこの企画が決定した。 夜のペケペケ体操 オーイシマサヨシとえなこが体操をする企画。YouTube限定で公開された番組第0話でのえなこの発言によりこの企画が決定した。 放送リスト 出演者 番組MC オーイシマサヨシ えなこ キャラクター ペケペケ役 - 青木佑磨 ペケ美役 - 乾曜子 ペコペコ役 - ダイス ペケペケ体操 インストラクター - Billy テーマソング オープニングテーマ えなこ「SP-LuSH ROAD」 作詞：ZAQ、作編曲：Tom-H@ck エンディングテーマ Astrow「グラビティ・フリー」 作詞・作曲：urei、編曲：Keisuke Fujimaki 放送局 脚注 注釈 出典 外部リンク 番組公式サイト - テレビ神奈川 番組公式サイト - BS11 2021年のテレビ番組 (日本) テレビ神奈川のバラエティ番組 大石昌良
__label__ja 唐沢川（からさわがわ）は、日本各地を流れる河川の名称。 唐沢川 (高崎市・榛東村) - 群馬県高崎市・北群馬郡榛東村を流れる利根川水系井野川支流の一級河川。 唐沢川 (渋川市) - 群馬県渋川市を流れる利根川水系茂沢川支流の河川。 唐沢川 (埼玉県) - 埼玉県深谷市を流れる利根川水系小山川支流の一級河川。 唐沢川 (厚木市・清川村) - 神奈川県厚木市および愛甲郡清川村を流れる相模川水系の河川。 唐沢川 (秦野市) - 神奈川県秦野市を流れる金目川水系の河川。 唐沢川 (新潟県) - 新潟県魚沼市を流れる信濃川水系田河川支流の一級河川。 唐沢川 (富士吉田市) - 山梨県富士吉田市を流れる相模川水系の河川。 唐沢川 (笛吹市) - 山梨県笛吹市を流れる富士川水系金川支流の一級河川。 唐沢川 (韮崎市) - 山梨県韮崎市を流れる富士川水系の一級河川。 唐沢川 (塩尻市・辰野町) - 長野県塩尻市・上伊那郡辰野町を流れる天竜川水系小野川支流の一級河川。 唐沢川 (下伊那郡) - 長野県下伊那郡松川町・高森町を流れる天竜川水系の一級河川。 唐沢川 (駒ヶ根市) - 長野県駒ヶ根市を流れる天竜川水系天王川支流の一級河川。 唐沢川 (山形村) - 長野県東筑摩郡山形村を流れる信濃川水系三間沢川支流の一級河川。 唐沢川 (岐阜県) - 岐阜県可児郡御嵩町を流れる木曽川水系可児川支流の一級河川。 唐沢川 (愛知県) - 愛知県みよし市を流れる境川水系小石川支流の河川。 同名の河川
__label__ja エーアイテレビ株式会社（AITV.Co.,Ltd.）は、徳島県板野郡藍住町に本社があるケーブルテレビ局である。 「エーアイ」とは、サービスエリアの藍住町、板野町それぞれの頭文字から名づけられた。 サービスエリア 徳島県板野郡 藍住町 板野町 主な放送チャンネル 地上波系列別再送信局 テレビ局 近畿広域圏の放送とサンテレビは大阪市内の受信点で受信、テレビ和歌山は和歌山市内の受信点で受信、光ケーブルで大阪 - 和歌山 - 淡路島 - 徳島へと伝送されていた（アナログのみ）。現在では営業エリア内にある受信点および県内ケーブルテレビの共同受信点で全てのチャンネルを受信している。 デジタル放送は日本民間放送連盟が区域外再放送を禁止しているが、特例地域に位置づけられていることから再送信が行われている。 デジタル再送信の要望を取り下げる見返り措置として、デジアナ変換によるよみうりテレビの再送信が2015年3月末まで実施された。 デジアナ変換サービスは2015年3月31日で終了。ただし、四国放送およびNHKについては統一地方選挙（徳島県）の政見放送に対応する為に4月20日まで放送した。 ラジオ局 アナウンサー 中野靖子 関連項目 ケーブルテレビ局の一覧 区域外再放送 STNet 脚注 外部リンク エーアイテレビ 徳島県のケーブルテレビ局 藍住町の企業 藍住町 板野町
__label__ja 甲南町野川（こうなんちょうのがわ）は、滋賀県甲賀市にある地名。 地理 甲賀市甲南町の東南部に位置し、東は甲南町下馬杉・甲賀町滝、南は三重県伊賀市内保・三重県伊賀市玉瀧、西は甲南町柑子、北は甲南町池田に接する。浅野川が南北に流れる。南北に滋賀県道134号上馬杉野尻線が貫通し、これに滋賀県道337号柑子塩野線・滋賀県道775号甲賀阿山線がつながる。 歴史 中世は馬杉荘に属したと考えられる。1338年、南朝軍が信楽より池原杣と野川郷に侵攻したが、六角氏に従う小佐治国氏・基氏らが杣の内の高徳寺まで追った。その後、伴氏が領したという。1585年の甲賀ゆれと水口岡山城築城によりその支配下に入ったと考えられるが、1592年の時点では539石余りが豊臣氏の蔵入地（直轄地）となっている。1600年から幕府領となり、1698年（元禄11年）宮川藩領となり、明治維新に至った。1871年（明治4年）の廃藩置県で宮川藩は宮川県となり、大津県を経て翌年に滋賀県に属した。1889年（明治22年）の町村制施行により宮村となり、その村役場が置かれた。1943年（昭和11年）に寺庄町・南杣村・龍池村と合併して甲南町に属し、2004年（平成16年）の甲賀市成立に至る。 世帯数と人口 2019年（令和元年）9月30日現在の世帯数と人口は以下の通りである。 学区 市立小・中学校に通う場合、学区は以下の通りとなる。 交通 滋賀県道134号上馬杉野尻線 滋賀県道337号柑子塩野線 滋賀県道775号甲賀阿山線 施設 甲賀市立甲南第三小学校 甲南第三地域市民センター 野川簡易郵便局 福泉寺 阿弥陀寺 伊勢廻寺 阿彌陀寺 その他 日本郵便 郵便番号 : 520-3305（集配局：甲南郵便局） 脚注 甲賀市の町・字
__label__ja ルイ・ド・ブルボン＝コンデ（）は、ブルボン家支流ブルボン＝コンデ家の人物。 一覧 複数存在する。 ルイ1世 (コンデ公) （1530年 - 1569年） - 初代コンデ公。ブルボン＝コンデ家の祖。 ルイ2世 (コンデ公) （1621年 - 1686年） - 第4代コンデ公。大コンデと呼ばれる。 ルイ3世 (コンデ公) （1668年 - 1710年） - 第6代コンデ公。ブルボン公の称号で知られる。 ルイ4世アンリ (コンデ公) （1692年 - 1740年） - 第7代コンデ公。ブルボン公の称号で知られる。 ルイ・ド・ブルボン＝コンデ (クレルモン伯) （1709年 - 1771年） - ルイ4世アンリの弟。 ルイ5世ジョゼフ (コンデ公) （1736年 - 1818年） - 第8代コンデ公。 ルイ6世アンリ (コンデ公) （1756年 - 1830年） - 第9代コンデ公。 ルイ・アントワーヌ・ド・ブルボン＝コンデ（1772年 - 1804年） - ルイ6世アンリの世子。アンギャン公。 関連項目 コンデ公 ルイ ルイ・ド・ブルボン
__label__ja 「時」（とき）は、中村雅俊の楽曲で、6枚目のシングル。1976年11月1日に日本コロムビアから発売された。 概要 小椋佳の義兄である塚原将は、レストランを経営しており、自作の詩を詩集にして本棚に展示していた。その中の「時」を小椋佳が目に止めて曲をつけたのが本作。 収録曲 A面 時（4分44秒） 作詞：塚原将、作曲：小椋佳、編曲：林哲司 B面 慣れてしまったもの想い（3分59秒） 作詞・作曲：小椋佳、編曲：林哲司 脚注 出典 関連項目 1976年の音楽 1977年のシングル 中村雅俊の楽曲 小椋佳が制作した楽曲 日本コロムビアの楽曲 日本のポピュラーソング き
__label__ja 会田氏（あいだし）は、日本の氏族のひとつ。 概要 海野幸氏の孫幸持から始まるとされる。鎌倉時代は伊勢神宮内宮領の信濃国筑摩郡会田御厨の地頭をつとめ、戦国時代は代々虚空蔵山城を本拠とした土豪として小笠原氏の寄騎をつとめた。 天文22年（1553年）幸久の時、主家が武田信玄に敗れ落城すると、越後国越谷に落延び、太田資正の家臣に転じ、のち北条氏康の家臣となった。幸久の子信清を経て、天正18年（1590年）孫の資久の時、越谷に隠棲する。江戸時代に入ると、資久の子資勝は徳川秀忠の小姓となり、その孫の資信は幕臣として500石を賜った。 また一族には、安曇郡穂高に移った会田氏がいる。現在、会田姓は主に埼玉県・福島県・山形県・新潟県に集中している。 脚注 日本の氏族 中部地方の氏族 関東地方の氏族
__label__ja 「キミを忘れないよ」（キミをわすれないよ）は、日本の歌手・大原櫻子の4作目のシングル。2015年11月4日にVictor Entertainmentから発売された。 概要 通常盤、「キミを忘れないよ」のミュージックビデオとメイキングが収録されたDVD付きの初回限定盤A、「Dear My Dream」のミュージックビデオとメイキングが収録されたDVD付きの初回限定盤Bの3形態で発売された。 収録曲 全形態共通 DVD (初回限定盤A) DVD (初回限定盤B) 参加ミュージシャン 大原櫻子：Vocal (#1,2,3) 河村"カースケ"智康：Drum (#1,4) 亀田誠治：Bass (#1,4)、All instruments (#2,5) 西川進：Guitar (#1,4) 皆川真人：Piano (#1,4) 金原千恵子ストリングス：Strings (#1,4) 豊田泰孝：Manipulator (#1,4) タイアップ 収録アルバム V (ビバ) (#1,2) 「映画ちびまる子ちゃん イタリアから来た少年」ミュージックアルバム (#1 ムービー・バージョン、ピアノ・アコースティック・バージョン、#4) 出典 2015年のシングル 大原櫻子の楽曲 ビクターエンタテインメントの楽曲 ちびまる子ちゃんの音楽 さくらももこが制作した楽曲 亀田誠治が制作した楽曲 みをわすれないよ
__label__ja NHK陸前横田テレビ中継局（エヌエイチケイりくぜんよこたテレビちゅうけいきょく）は、岩手県陸前高田市に設置されているNHK盛岡放送局のテレビ中継局。 所在地 陸前高田市横田町字砂子田（西方高地） 中継局概要 地上デジタルテレビ放送 地上アナログテレビ放送 当初、2011年7月24日で廃局となる予定だったが、同年3月11日に発生した東日本大震災の影響により、廃局が2012年3月31日まで延期された。 放送エリアなど 陸前高田中継局からの電波が届きにくい横田町（国道340号沿い）をカバーしている。尚、在盛民放局は当地に中継局を置いておらず、周辺局を受信。 関連項目 NHK盛岡放送局 陸前高田テレビ・FM中継局 NHK大船渡立根テレビ中継局 NHK陸前広田テレビ中継局 NHK住田八日町テレビ中継局 外部リンク - NHK盛岡放送局ホームページ 廃えぬえいちけいりくせんよこたてれひちゆうけいきよく NHK盛岡 NHKの放送送信施設 廃えぬえいちけいりくせんよこたてれひちゆうけいきよく えぬえいちけいりくせんよこたてれひちゆうけいきよく
__label__ja 音戸警察署（おんどけいさつしょ）はかつて存在した広島県警察が管轄する警察署の一つである。 所在地 広島県呉市音戸町南隠渡一丁目11番48号 管轄区域 呉市のうち音戸町・倉橋町全域 沿革 1877年3月広島警察署海田市分署第二分屯所として発足する。 1877年7月広島警察署瀬戸分署に改称する。 1886年11月呉警察署瀬戸分署に改称する。 1898年4月呉警察署音戸警察分署に改称する。 1914年7月呉警察署音戸分署に改称する。 1926年7月音戸警察署に昇格する。 1943年4月呉警察署音戸警部補派出所に改称する。 1946年12月音戸水上警察署に改称する。 1948年1月広島地区水上警察署に改称する。 1948年3月自治体警察音戸町警察署が発足し、広島地区水上警察署を併設する。 1948年7月広島地区水上警察所が廃止され、自治体警察音戸町警察署だけになる。 1951年10月国家地方警察音戸地区警察署に改称する。 1954年7月広島県音戸警察署に改称する。 2005年3月管轄区域全域が呉市になる。 2018年4月 呉警察署に統合、同署の分庁舎内に音戸交番を新設。 警察署直轄区域 呉市のうち音戸町鰯浜一丁目～三丁目、音戸町北隠渡一丁目・二丁目、音戸町高須一丁目～三丁目、音戸町坪井一丁目～三丁目、音戸町波多見一丁目～十一丁目、音戸町引地一丁目・二丁目、音戸町南隠渡一丁目～四丁目 警察官駐在所 須川警察官駐在所（呉市倉橋町須川宮西平） 呉市のうち倉橋町（大向、尾曽郷、須川、西宇土） 田原警察官駐在所（呉市音戸町田原一丁目） 呉市のうち音戸町田原一丁目～三丁目、音戸町渡子一丁目～三丁目、音戸町早瀬一丁目～三丁目 畑警察官駐在所（呉市音戸町畑三丁目） 呉市のうち音戸町有清一丁目・二丁目、音戸町先奥一丁目～三丁目、音戸町畑一丁目～三丁目、音戸町藤脇一丁目～三丁目 本浦警察官駐在所（呉市倉橋町本浦上河内） 呉市のうち倉橋町（石原、宇和木、上河内、黒島、小林、才ノ木、重生、長谷、灘、松原、横島、釣士田） 室尾警察官駐在所（呉市倉橋町室尾） 呉市のうち倉橋町（大迫、尾立、海越、鹿島上、鹿島下、鹿島中、鹿老渡、室尾西、室尾東） おんと 呉市の建築物 倉橋島
__label__ja 社団（しゃだん、英仏: association、独: Verein）とは、大陸法及び英米法における民事法上の概念で、一定の目的によって結集した人の集団について用いられる。大陸法においては、一定の目的によって結合した財産の集団である財団と対立する概念ともされる。 日本法における社団 社団法人 講学上、法人格を有する社団は広く社団法人と呼ばれる。会社や一般社団法人がその典型である。 法令用語としては、広義の社団法人のうち、民法または民法施行法に基づいて設立されたもののみを社団法人と呼称していたが、一般社団法人及び一般財団法人に関する法律（一般社団・財団法人法）の2008年12月施行に伴い、狭義の社団法人である民法または民法施行法に基づく社団法人は2013年11月30日の移行期間満了までに解散または一般社団法人へ移行することになった。 なお、民法以外の法律によって法人格を取得した社団は、それぞれの法律によって定められた名称によって呼ばれる。 社団と組合 伝統的な理解によれば、組合は団体の構成員からの独立性が弱い点で社団と峻別されるとみるが、組合であっても営利目的であれば会社設立も可能であり、権利能力及び社団性のない人的団体にのみ民法の組合に関する規定は適用されるということになる。 一方、そもそも、現代の実社会における組合と社団の両者を異質なものと捉えることには無理があるとの見解も主張されており、この見解によれば、もはや民法上の組合とは民法の組合に関する規定を適用すべき団体を指すというよりないとされる。 権利能力なき社団 法人格（権利能力）を持たない社団も、一定の要件を満たせば法人と同様に取り扱われることもある。 例えば、 団体としての組織を備え、 多数決の原則が行われ、 構成員の変更にかかわらず団体そのものが存続し、 その組織において代表の方法、総会の運営、財産管理その他団体としての主要な点が確定している 場合には、民事訴訟法上で当事者能力が認められる。 社団国家論 主権国家成立以前の、国内の社団に権力機構が分散した国家体制を社団国家と呼ぶ。 注釈 関連項目 法人 財団 財団法人 民法 結社 - 英語ではどちらもassociation 法人法 組織 (団体)
__label__ja 嵩山村（すせむら）は、愛知県八名郡にかつて存在した村。 現在の豊橋市の一部（嵩山町）に該当する。 本坂通（姫街道）（東海道の脇街道の1つ）の嵩山宿があった村である。 歴史 1764年（明和元年） - 江戸幕府の道中奉行により、嵩山村の集落を本坂街道の正式な宿場と認めるという裁可が下され、嵩山宿が成立。 1878年（明治11年） - 嵩山村、月ヶ谷村、長彦村が合併し、嵩山村となる。 1889年（明治22年）10月1日 - 町村制により、嵩山村が発足。 1906年（明治39年）7月1日 - 多米村、三輪村、西郷村、玉川村と合併し、石巻村が発足。同日嵩山村は廃止。 教育 嵩山尋常小学校（現・豊橋市立嵩山小学校） 参考文献 石巻村誌編集委員会 『石巻村誌』 石巻村、1957年。 角川日本地名大辞典23 愛知県 関連項目 愛知県の廃止市町村一覧 豊橋市域の廃止市町村 八名郡 1889年設置の日本の市町村 1906年廃止の日本の市町村
__label__ja アドリアン・ルルジュライ（、）は、モンテネグロ・ウルツィニ出身のアルバニア人の歌手である。2012年12月22日に開催されたフェスティヴァリ・イ・ケンゲス2012の決勝戦にてブレダル・セイコとの共演曲「」が優勝を果たし、2013年5月にスウェーデンのマルメで開催されるユーロビジョン・ソング・コンテスト2013のアルバニア代表となることが決まった。 2012年6月、音楽祭トップ・フェスト2012に参加して「Evoloj」を歌い、最優秀男性アーティストに選出される。 脚注 アルバニアの歌手 モンテネグロの歌手 ユーロビジョン・ソング・コンテスト2013参加者 アルバニアのユーロビジョン・ソング・コンテスト参加者 1980年生 存命人物
__label__ja ロベルト・ファン・ランケル（Robert Van Lancker、1946年12月11日 - ）は、ベルギー、グラス＝ベルルール出身の元自転車競技（トラックレース）選手。 来歴 1967年 トラックレース世界選手権 アマタンデム 3位 選手権 アマタンデム 優勝（+ ダニエル・フンス） 1968年 メキシコシティオリンピック タンデム 3位 トラックレース世界選手権 アマタンデム 2位 アマスプリント 3位 選手権 アマスプリント 優勝 アマタンデム 優勝（+ ダニエル・フンス） 1969年、プロ転向 トラックレース世界選手権 プロスプリント 2位 1970年 選手権 スプリント 優勝 タンデム 優勝 1971年 トラックレース世界選手権 プロスプリント 2位 選手権 スプリント 優勝 1972年 トラックレース世界選手権 優勝 選手権 スプリント 優勝 1973年 トラックレース世界選手権 優勝 選手権 スプリント 優勝 モントリオール6日間レース 優勝（+ フェルディナント・ブラック） 1974年 トラックレース世界選手権 プロスプリント 3位 選手権 スプリント 優勝 1976年 選手権 スプリント 優勝 外部リンク ベルギーの男子自転車選手 オリンピック自転車競技ベルギー代表選手 ベルギーのオリンピック銅メダリスト 自転車競技のオリンピックメダリスト 世界選手権自転車競技大会トラックレース優勝者 リエージュ州出身の人物 1946年生 存命人物
__label__ja BGMチャート（）は、韓国音楽コンテンツ産業協会が運営する韓国初の大衆音楽チャートガオンチャートのシングル人気チャートである。2010年4月11日から開始された。ガオンチャート開始直後は、年2回単位で発表されることが計画されていた。現在は週・月単位で発表されている。 類似したチャート 同じくシングル売上をランキング付けするデジタルチャートと類似するが、デジタルチャートはデジタル売上高のみを集計している。 アメリカ合衆国発の国際的なチャートBillboard Hot 100とも類似する。 チャート 月間 詳細は以下を参照 2010年 年間 出典 外部リンク 音楽の指標 韓国の音楽
__label__ja スラックライン（）細いベルト状のラインの上でバランスを楽しむ遊びである。バランス感覚や集中力などを鍛えることができると他のスポーツのオフトレーニングとしても幅広く使用される。 概要 設置する場所、テンション（張力）、長さ、目的によって様々な遊び方ができるのが最大の特徴である。ラインの伸縮を利用しアクロバティックな技を行うトリックライン、ゆるく長いラインの上で歩行を楽しむロングライン、高所で精神的なコントロールが求められるハイライン、水面で楽しむウォーターライン、全くテンションを張らずに乗るロデオライン、スラックラインの上でエクササイズを行うスラックラインフットネス、ヨガを行うスラックラインヨガと様々である。 設置方法 一般的には木と木の２点間にスラックラインを張る。初心者は安全面から長さ3〜4メートル、高さ30センチメートル程度のスペックから練習する事が推奨されている。室内用器具のスラックラックも市販されている。 注意事項 木をアンカーとする場合は、細い木や弱った木は避けること。木の直径は25センチメートル以上が望ましいとされる。 屋外での設置は人、自転車、車などの通る動線に設置しない。 設置したままその場を離れない。 木にラインを巻く際は、ツリープロテクター、ツリーウェアなどを巻いてラインと樹皮の保護に務めること。 遊び方 動きやすい服装に、足元はスニーカーもしくは裸足が推奨されている。まずは立つ練習から行い、立てるようになれば足を入れ替えることで歩くことが可能となる。この時に勢いで歩くと踏み外して転けてしまう場合があるので注意が必要である。 スポーツ競技としてのスラックライン スラックライン愛好家のサポート支援強化のため、2011年5月20日に世界スラックライン連盟（World Slachline Federation、略称：WSFed）が設立されている。大会では技の難易度、コンビネーション、創造性を中心にジャッジされるが、観客へのアピールも審査対象となっている。 アメリカで開催されたスラックラインワールドカップ2013では、大杉徹が日本人として初めて優勝した。 アメリカで開催されたスラックラインワールドカップ2017では、細江樹が優勝した。 脚注 ニュースポーツ 野外活動 スポーツ競技
__label__ja アン・フェレリス・フェネラ・ボーズ＝ライアン（Anne Ferelith Fenella Bowes-Lyon, 1917年12月4日 - 1980年9月26日）は、イギリス出身の貴族女性で、デンマーク王子ゲーオの妻。イギリス王ジョージ6世の王妃エリザベスの姪で、エリザベス2世女王の母方の従姉にあたる。結婚後のデンマーク語名はプリンセス・アンネ・ア・ダンマーク（Prinsesse Anne af Danmark）。 生涯 スコットランド貴族の第14代ストラスモア伯爵の次男ジョン・ハーバート・ボーズ＝ライアン（John Herbert Bowes-Lyon, 1886年 - 1930年）と、その妻で第21代クリントン男爵の娘フェネラ・ヘップバーン＝ステュアート＝フォーブス＝トレフューシス（Fenella Hepburn-Stuart-Forbes-Trefusis, 1889年 - 1966年）の間の次女として生まれた。1938年4月28日に第4代リッチフィールド伯爵の嗣子であるアンソン子爵トマス・アンソン（Thomas Anson, Viscount Anson, 1913年 - 1958年）と結婚し、アンソン子爵夫人（Viscountess Anson）と呼ばれた。アンソンとの間には1男1女をもうけたが、1948年には離婚した。 1950年9月16日にグラームス城において、デンマーク王フレゼリク9世の又従弟にあたるゲーオ王子と再婚した。1980年、心筋梗塞により62歳で死去した。 子女 最初の夫との間に1男1女をもうけている。 パトリック・アンソン（1939年 - 2005年） - 第5代リッチフィールド伯爵、写真家 エリザベス・アンソン（1941年 - 2020年） - 第6代准男爵ジェフリー・シェーカリーと結婚 脚注 あん ほすらいあん あん 1917年生 1980年没 ワシントンD.C.出身の人物
__label__ja ニコニコ電話（ニコニコでんわ）とは、かつてニワンゴが提供していた、ニコニコ内のサービスの1つである。 概要 ニコニコ電話は、プレミアム会員限定でニコニコ生放送の出演者と携帯電話で対話することができるサービスで、2010年2月8日にサービス開始。対応機器はNTTドコモ端末のみ。 ニコニコ生放送をニコ生モバイルアプリで視聴すると対応する番組で「ニコニコ電話に参加する？」メッセージが表示され、「参加する」を選択すると抽選が行われる。そして、当選すると「あなたがニコニコ電話に選ばれました」メッセージが表示され、30秒間電話をかけることができる。通話音声は他視聴者にも公開され、通話料はユーザーが負担する。 iモード版は「コミュニティ/SNS」からアクセス可能。EZweb版やYahoo!ケータイ版への対応予定は未定であった。 また、ユーザー生放送でニコニコ電話をするとその回数によって獲得することができるスタンプ「ニコ電100人できるかな」がLv1-Lv6まで存在したほか、ニコニコ電話を使った生放送をすると獲得できるスタンプ「ニコ電放送」がLv1-Lv4、初めてニコニコ電話に申し込むと獲得できるスタンプ「はじめてのニコ電」も存在した。 2014年1月23日、ニコニコ電話はサービスを終了した。 脚注 関連項目 ニコニコ動画 ニコニコ生放送 ニコニコ動画
__label__ja NBAサマーリーグ（）は、NBAのシーズンオフに行われるトーナメント戦で、ラスベガスサマーリーグとオーランドサマーリーグから成る。各チームが、前シーズンのラインアップとは異なる選手を試すために行われる。一般的に、新人、若い控えの選手、NBA実績のない選手を、チームが契約するかどうか決定することを目的に、リーグに招待される。ファンだけでなく、メディアの主な利点は、トップルーキーのプレビューにより、学生バスケットボールからNBAへの移行を確認できることである。過去のNBAプレーヤーが、海外やGリーグからNBAのロースター上にカムバックを図るための場でもある。 開催地 現在、2か所で開催されているサマーリーグの一つはラスベガスで開催され、もう一つはアムウェイ・センター内にあるオーランド・マジックのための練習コートで開催されている。2008年までは、ロッキーマウンテン・レヴュー（ユタ・ジャズが経営する）で開催されていたが、参加チームの減少を理由に2009年に場所を移した。 参加チーム ラスベガスサマーリーグ オーランドサマーリーグ チャンピオン 脚注 外部リンク さまありいく
__label__ja シンデレラガール（Cinderella + girl）とは、童話『シンデレラ』に準えて、無名だったにもかかわらず、突然有名になった女性を指す和製英語。英語では単にCinderellaという。シンデレラ・ストーリーを参照。 東宝「シンデレラ」オーディション優勝者のこと。シンデレラ娘。 アイドルマスター シンデレラガールズ - バンダイナムコエンターテインメントとCygamesが運営するソーシャルゲーム。同名のテレビアニメ『アイドルマスター シンデレラガールズ』やスマートフォン向け音楽ゲーム『アイドルマスター シンデレラガールズ スターライトステージ』も展開されている。 シンデレラガール (曲) - King & Princeのデビューシングル。TBS系火曜ドラマ『花のち晴れ〜花男 Next Season〜』主題歌。 シンデレラガール (映画) - 2023年公開の日本映画。緒方貴臣監督、伊礼姫奈主演。 脚注 関連項目 シンデレラボーイ（曖昧さ回避） 和製英語 同名の作品 シンデレラ
__label__ja ジョージ・ファン・ビースブルック（George A. Van BiesbroeckまたはGeorges-Achille Van Biesbroeck、1880年 1月21日 - 1974年2月23日）は、ベルギー生まれでアメリカ合衆国に移住した天文学者。 周期彗星 53P/ファン・ビースブルック彗星、非周期彗星 C/1925 W1 、C/1935 Q1を発見した他、16個の小惑星を発見した。 ベルギーの ヘントに生まれた。初め土木技術者になったが、1904年に仕事をやめ、ユックルのベルギー王立天文台の職員となった。 第1次世界大戦勃発後の1915年に家族と共にアメリカ合衆国に渡り、ヤーキス天文台で二重星、彗星、小惑星、変光星の観測を行った。1957年にジェームズ・クレイグ・ワトソン・メダルを受賞した。1945年にヤーキス天文台を65歳で退職するがその後も活動的で、1963年にツーソンの月惑星研究所(Lunar and Planetary Laboratory）に加わった。 小惑星(1781)ファン・ビースブルックはファン・ビースブルックを記念して命名された他、月のクレータに命名されている。赤色矮星 ファン・ビースブルック星 (Wolf 1055 AB)にも名前が残されている。 長年貢献した個人に贈られるジョージ・ファン・ビースブルック賞が1979年に創設され、1997年からアメリカ天文学会 (American Astronomical Society)に引き継がれた。 関連項目 19世紀生まれの天文学者 出典 ベルギーの天文学者 アメリカ合衆国の天文学者 ジェームズ・クレイグ・ワトソン・メダルの受賞者 小惑星発見者 彗星発見者 ヘント出身の人物 1880年生 1974年没 しよおしふあんひいすふるつく
__label__ja ジャン＝フランソワ・ルーベル(、1747年10月6日 – 1807年11月24日)は、フランスの弁護士、外交官、政治家。 革命期 1747年10月6日、ルーベルはコルマール（現オー＝ラン県県庁所在地）に生まれた。弁護士となった彼は、コルマール＝セレスタ管轄区の第三身分として1789年の三部会に選出された。 憲法制定国民議会で行われたルーベルの演説は、彼の法律知識と耐乏生活が強く反映されたものであった。彼は聖職者民事基本法に賛成の立場を示したが、一方でユダヤ人に対する人権宣言には反対した。 ヴァレンヌ逃亡事件後の1791年7月、ジャコバン派を去りフイヤン派に加入した。立法議会やインハウスローヤーを経て、1792年、フランス第一共和政の国民公会に当選した。1794年12月6日から21日までの約2週間国民公会議長を務めている。 総裁政府以降 ルーベルはマクシミリアン・ロベスピエールによるジャコバン派独裁を終わらせたテルミドールのクーデターに参加した。その後再編された公安委員会及びに加わった。1795年前半には、バタヴィア共和国との講和交渉をしていたエマニュエル＝ジョゼフ・シエイエスの後押しをしている。 1795年11月、総裁政府総裁に選出されたルーベルは総裁に就任、元老会にも加盟した。彼は議会から王党派を排除するためフリュクティドール18日のクーデターを引き起こし、成功した。ネーデルラント併合やスイス侵攻によるヘルヴェティア共和国樹立などにも関わったが、1799年の選挙で総裁の身を引き、後任にはシエイエスが就いた。ブリュメールのクーデターでナポレオン・ボナパルトが台頭するとルーベルは政界から完全に引退し、1807年11月24日にコルマールで死去した。 参考文献 L. Sciout, Le Directoire (Paris, 1895—97). フランスの政治家 フランス革命関連人物 フランス第一共和政の人物 ジャコバン派 フイヤン派 コルマール出身の人物 1747年生 1807年没
__label__ja Kaori@livedoor PHOENIX（カオリ・アット・ライブドアフェニックス）は、かつて存在した日本の女性アイドルグループである。ライブドア（旧社。後のLDH。※同名芸能事務所とは無関係）が手がけたアイドルグループでもある。略称：K@LP 概要 ビクターエンタテインメント、JVCエンタテインメント・ネットワークスとライブドア共同開催のオーディション『とんでもない夏2004』の入賞者3人によって結成。ライブドアのマスコット的存在の期待を込めて、同年設立する予定であったプロ野球球団（球団名：仙台ライブドアフェニックス、会社名：ライブドアベースボール）にちなみ、「ライブドアフェニックス」の名をつけた。 「ライブドアフェニックス」の名によって話題にはなったが活動はパッとせず、2006年1月31日をもって解散する。解散後も、たまにメンバーがライブを行っている。 メンバー Kaori フロント担当、7月20日生、163cm B86cm W58cm H84cm 旧芸名：星元香（ほしもと・かおり）。 かつて旧イエローキャブに所属し、巨乳グラビアアイドルグループ「R.C.T.」にて活動。解散後の詳細な活動は不明。 Yukko 2月19生、160cm B88cm W60cm H89cm 別芸名：あべ由紀子 結成前から「あべ由紀子」の芸名でタレント活動を行う。解散後は元の芸名に戻してタレント活動を続行中。 INDY 1月16生、156cm B82cm W57cm H82cm 解散後の詳細な活動は不明。 作品歴 「ハートのエースが出てこない」（2005年3月16日） 「ムシキング・サンバ!」（2005年6月25日） 「カオリ&ムシキング・アミーゴス」名義、甲虫王者ムシキングEDテーマ 関連項目 ライブドアベースボール LDH (持株会社) 脚注 外部リンク Kaori@livedoor PHOENIX 公式ブログ - 2009年7月15日時点のインターネットアーカイブ。 日本の女性アイドルグループ 日本の歌手グループ ライブドア 2004年に結成した音楽グループ 2006年に解散した音楽グループ 3人組の音楽グループ
__label__ja ウミトゲアリ（海棘蟻、 Polyrhachis sokolova）は、ハチ目（膜翅目）アリ科トゲアリ属に属する、アリの一種。 オーストラリア北部のマングローブに生息しており、アリの仲間では唯一マングローブ汽水域に生息の場を伸ばした種として有名である。 形態 働きアリの体長は7mmほどとなる。女王アリは12mm。働きアリの背部には4本のトゲアリ特有の針状突起がある。 全身は黒く、他のトゲアリ類に比べると微毛が多く毛深くなっているが、これは後述する水中生活に適応したためとなっている。 生態 マングローブの浜に穴を掘り、そこを巣とする。干潮時に出てきて、海から運ばれてきた魚の死骸や、小さな甲殻類などをエサにしている。満潮時になる前には再び巣に戻る生活を繰り返している。 海中への適応 海中に住み場所を選んだため、それに適応した作りとして別種のアリに比べると多い剛毛が手脚に生えており、これを表面張力によって海水を身体から弾きながら、アメンボのように水上を泳げるようになっている。そのスピードは1秒間に50cmも移動すると云われる。 海中に潜った際にも短時間なら陸上同様の活動ができる。水中を潜って歩く際には体毛に空気を纏い、それによって呼吸しながら水中での活動を可能にしている。満潮時に巣に戻れなかった場合には仮死状態となり、数時間はそのままで再び潮が引くのを待って潮が完全に引くと、行動を再開する。 巣はマングローブの砂浜に直接掘られ、地下では普通のアリの巣のように、いくつかの広いスペースが枝状に拡がった造りになっている。満潮時には巣は浸水してしまうが、いくつかの区切られた部屋には粘土質の土と内部に入った空気の浸透圧の関係によって浸水しない箇所があり、そういった場所にエサを保管したり、幼虫を育てるようにしているほか、巣の中のアリたちもそうした浸水しない箇所に待避する。逃げ遅れたり、巣が壊された場合には前述の仮死状態になって凌いだ後、再び巣の補修と増築を行う。 こういった特異な生態になった背景には、海に住んでそこの豊富なエサを得る目的と、陸上に住むキバハリアリ属のような別種の強力なアリとの競合を避けるため、海へ生活の場を選んだといわれる。 外部リンク 075回「超高速！海を泳ぐアリ」│ダーウィンが来た！生きもの新伝説 アリ
__label__ja 教育委員会法（きょういくいいんかいほう）は、公選制の教育委員会等について定めていた法律である。 概略 1948年（昭和23年）7月15日に公布・施行された。 教育委員会の種別を都道府県委員会・地方委員会とし、都道府県委員会は都道府県に、地方委員会は市町村に設置する。地方委員会は町村によって構成される一部事務組合に設置することができる。都道府県教育委員会に7名、地方委員会に5名の委員をおき、1名は議会の議員から議会で選挙し残りは公選する。公選の委員の任期は4年。教育委員会は首長に対して、教育関係予算の原案を提出することができる。 地方教育行政の組織及び運営に関する法律により1956年9月30日に廃止された。（いわゆる「逆コース」） 構成 第1章 総則（第1条―第6条） 第2章 教育委員会の組織 第1節 教育委員会の委員（第7条―第32条） 第2節 教育委員会の会議（第33条―第40条） 第3節 教育長及び事務局（第41条―第47条） 第3章 教育委員会の職務権限（第48条―第65条） 第4章 雑則（第66条―第68条） 附則 関連項目 教育委員会 中野区教育委員候補者選定に関する区民投票条例 日本の旧教育法令 廃止された日本の法律 1948年の法 1956年に廃止された法 日本の教育委員会
__label__ja 外傷性脳損傷（がいしょうせいのうそんしょう、traumatic brain injury）は、頭部に物理的な衝撃が加わり起こる脳損傷。略称TBI。軽度のものは軽度外傷性脳損傷(mild traumatic brain injury＝MTBI)と区別することもある。頭部がダメージを受ける機構については、頭部外傷の項を参照のこと。 脳の一部が局所的にダメージを受ける脳挫傷とは異なり、脳の軸索が広範囲に損傷を受けるもの。軽度から中程度の損傷においては、早期回復が期待されるが、高次脳機能障害に至った場合、記憶力、注意力の低下や人格形成やコミュニケーション能力に問題が生じるほか、四肢の麻痺が生じることもある。外見上、健常人と何ら変化は無いが、社会適応性が損なわれるため、通常の生活が送れずに苦しむ患者は多い。 疫学 外傷性脳損傷の発症原因の多くは、交通事故や階段からの転落などの事故と目されているが、アメリカ合衆国では、兵士が交戦時に負傷する例で知られている。 1990年代以降の非対称戦争では、地雷や携帯型小型ミサイルを改造した即席爆発装置（IED）が使用されるようになったが、即席といえども。外見上は無傷に近いものの、後日、深刻な外傷性脳損傷を受けていたことが判明する例も増加した。これら兵士が帰還後に記憶障害や歩行障害に苦しむ例が増えたため、アメリカ政府は2009年に診断基準を変更、2001年から2009年10月まで約14万人が受傷したとの結果をとりまとめている。 脚注 関連項目 転倒 記憶障害 / 健忘 / 失語症 アフガニスタン紛争 (2001年-2021年) イラク戦争 パープルハート章 爆傷 参考文献・外部リンク 外傷性脳損傷 - MSDマニュアル プロフェッショナル版 MTBI仲間の会 脳外傷とは（米国脳外傷協会のホームページを翻訳したもの） - 脳外傷問題 TBIA JAPAN NET 日本における診断基準など（大阪脳損傷リハビリネットワーク） 軽度外傷性脳損傷友の会 アメリカ兵の被害報道の取りまとめ（移動支援フォーラム） 外傷 脳神経外科学 精神医学的診断
__label__ja 『デカ吉チビ助のニワトリ狩り』（デカきちチビすけのニワトリがり、原題：Henpecked Hoboes 公開：1946年10月26日）は、アメリカ合衆国の映画会社メトロ・ゴールドウィン・メイヤー (MGM) に所属していたアニメーターのテックス・アヴェリーによる作品のひとつ。 スタッフ 監督 - テックス・アヴェリー 制作総括 - フレッド・クインビー アニメーション制作 - エド・ラブ、レイ・エイブラムズ、プレストン・ブレア、ウォルター・クリントン、アーヴン・スペンス（クレジット無し） 脚本 - ヘック・アレン 音楽 - スコット・ブラッドリー 内容 片田舎をさまようデカ吉・チビ助のコンビが腹をすかせていた。そんなコンビが見つけたのが美味そうな一羽のめん鶏。捕らえて鶏の丸焼きにしようとあの手この手を講じるも、デカ吉がヘマばかりでなかなかうまくいかない。 登場するキャラクター デカ吉 兄貴分のチビ助に命じられニワトリを捕らえようとするが間抜けで、いつも相棒のチビ助をひどい目にあわせてしまう。その度にチビ助からお仕置きを受けることになる。ヒヨコに化けてニワトリをおびき寄せることを命じられるが、「母親がいない」と涙して嫌がる場面があり、笑いの中にも悲しさを誘う。 チビ助 身体は小さいがデカ吉の兄貴分。ニワトリを捕らえようとアイディアを企画し、デカ吉に命じて捕らえようとするがうまくいかない。その度にデカ吉にきついお仕置きを行うというやや残酷で尖ったキャラ。母親のいないデカ吉にニワトリをおびき出させるという罰当たりなことを考え、その結果感情移入したデカ吉にこっぴどくやられる場面も。 ニワトリ オスとメスのつがい。メスは浮気者で、ニワトリに化けたチビ助におびき出される。オスの方はチビ助にうまくやられ、北極まで飛ばされる。メスはデカ吉チビ助のコンビに狙われるが、両者が自滅し難を逃れる。最後はデカ吉にお仕置きをしたチビ助をやっつけるが、北極から戻ってきたオスに浮気の仕返しをされこっぴどくやられる。 日本でのテレビ放映 『トムとジェリー』の「真ん中の作品」として各地で放送された。また、チビ助がダイナマイトで真っ黒になるシーンは現在のバージョンではカットされている。 トムとジェリー真ん中作品の短編映画 1946年のアニメ映画 テックス・アヴェリーの監督映画 ニワトリを題材としたアニメ映画
__label__ja 『1st TOUR 2015 SPRING〜CHERRYYYY BLOSSOOOOM!!!〜』（ファースト・ツアー・ツーサウザンドフィフティーン・スプリング・チェリー・ブロッサム）は、日本の歌手・大原櫻子が2015年7月22日にVictor Entertainmentから発売した1作目の映像作品。 概要 DVDとBlu-rayの2形態がリリースされた。メイキング映像、フォトブックが付いている。最終公演会場である、TSUTAYA O-EASTの模様を収録している。 収録曲 DVD・Blu-ray 脚注 2015年のコンサート 2015年のライブ・ビデオ 長大な音楽作品名
__label__ja デービット・ホルトン（David Halton）は起業家であり、スポーツ栄養サプリメント会社、株式会社ボディプラスインターナショナルとHALEO, Incの創設者。株式会社ボディプラスインターナショナルはBリーグプロバスケットボールチーム、仙台89ERSのスポンサー。ホルトンは東京の代官山にあるジムHALEO代官山および米国カリフォルニア州サンディエゴ市のHALEO, Inc.のオーナーでもある。 人物 1975年9月12日、カナダのアルバータ州エドモントン市でカナダ人を父親、日本人を母親として生まれる。父親はホルトンが5歳の時に死去。姉と共にシングルマザーの母親に育てられた。14歳で日本を訪れた時に初めて丸の内のビジネス街を目にし、日本で会社を作ろうと思う。高校を中退した後、19歳で来日、日本で起業することになる。 略歴 21歳の時、仙台市の自宅アパートの一室から始めて開業。日本で2社、アメリカで1社を立ち上げたがアメリカの会社は6千万円の負債を抱えて倒産。その後日本でHALEOとバルクスポーツという自社ブランドの製造を開始。 2009年には宮城県仙台市にHALEO本社（アセンドビル）を建設。 2010年には格闘技の前プライドチャンピオン三崎和雄選手と共に、日本人選手を集めてHALEO TOP TEAMを作った。 2011年、東日本大震災が発生し仙台は地震と津波の災害に襲われる。ホルトンの事業も個人資産も一夜にして失われそうになった。HALEO TOP TEAMと地元カナダ人ミュージックバンドMONKEY MAJIK、ヒップホップグループGAGLEなどの協力を得てホルトンの会社は地元自衛隊の主要サポーターとなり、チャリティイベント、HALEO Fight for Japanを主催した。 震災直後、ホルトンの会社は地元プロバスケットボールチーム仙台89ERSの復活をサポート、選手たちの練習の場と子供たちのバスケットボールキャンプの場を提供するHALEOドーム開設を援助。その年、カリフォルニア州サンディエゴ市にHALEO Inc.を設立、HALEOは国際的に初めての日本スポーツサプリメントブランドとなった。 2013年、HALEOはUFCジャパンの公式サプリメント提供会社となる。 ホルトンは仙台市の起業イニシャチブや、Venture Generation Incubation センターのアドバイザーも務めている。 脚注 外部リンク 社長TV HALEO 企業創立者 スポーツ経営者
__label__ja 西浜（にしはま）は、青森県津軽半島西部の日本海沿岸を指す地名である。別称 津軽西浜。 沿革 かつて陸奥国津軽地方の平賀郡、鼻和郡、田舎郡の津軽三郡は12世紀には史料上には見えるが、この三郡以外の西海岸地区と陸奥湾沿岸地域には郡は設置されず、西浜と外浜と広域称で呼ばれた。 天文年間(1532～55年)の津軽郡中名字では、馬(うまの)郡・江流末(えるま)郡・鼻和郡西部にあたる。（津軽一統志） 脚注 参考文献 関連項目 西浜街道 外部リンク 青森県東津軽郡蓬田村 蓬田村 村のあらまし>村史>第三章 津軽氏の統一以前 青森県の地域 青森県の歴史 陸奥国
__label__ja 愛国路駅（あいこくろえき、中国語簡体字：爱国路站、英語：Aiguo Road Station）は、中華人民共和国上海市楊浦区長陽路内江路の交差点付近にある駅。上海軌道交通12号線の32駅の一つ。 駅歴史 計画時 最初に「内江路」の駅名を設定した。しかし、最終的に「愛国路」に変更された。 2008年12月30日 12号線の建設が開始。 2013年12月29日 12号線の東段（愛国路駅を含む）が建設完了。当駅が開業。 駅出口及び周辺 四つの出口がある。 1、2番：長陽路 3、4番：長陽路、内江路 付近に上海市青少年業余足球（アマチュアサッカー）学校や上海市楊浦区民防工事管理所や上海市楊浦区行政学院などがある 駅構造 改札階までエレベーター・エスカレーター・階段がある。改札口前に安全検査マシンが設置された。地下駅には1面2線ホーム。 のりば 隣の駅 12号線 隆昌路駅 - 愛国路駅 - 復興島駅 ギャラリー 関連項目 上海軌道交通12号線 脚注 上海地下鉄の駅 楊浦区の鉄道駅 2013年開業の鉄道駅
__label__ja 小島 邦裕（こじま くにひろ、1978年2月11日 - ）は、日本の俳優。神奈川県藤沢市辻堂出身。身長178cm。辻堂小学校 湘洋中学校 玉川大学文学部教育学科健康スポーツコース（現教育学部教育学科）卒業。 人物 大学時代よりスポーツ指導者として各種レッスンを担当。また、2002年より舞台を中心に芸能活動を開始。サーフィンが得意でグループを組んでいた。 元TEAM 発砲・B・ZIN団員。2006年には「超星艦隊セイザーX」のジャッカル役で強烈な印象を残した。 出演 特撮 超星艦隊セイザーX（2006年） - ジャッカル役 テレビドラマ こちら本池上署（2005年） - 古賀大作 DRAMA COMPLEX「松本清張スペシャル・指」（2006年） 水曜ミステリー9「信濃のコロンボ事件ファイル」（2007 ‐ 2008年） - 川島刑事 月曜ゴールデン「探偵 左文字進12」（2008年） - 岡本秘書 映画 激情版 エリートヤンキー三郎（2009年） 音楽 サーフィン部 「We are surfing boys」（シングル・2004年7月7日） We are surfing boys（作詞・作曲：西ノ園達大） 言い忘れた言葉（作詞：小島邦裕・作曲：西ノ園達大） 想夏（作詞・作曲：西ノ園達大） TEAM 発砲・B・ZIN団員の工藤潤矢・西ノ園達大・小島邦裕によるユニット（Producer 中村隆道） 日本の男優 玉川大学出身の人物 神奈川県出身の人物 1978年生 存命人物
__label__ja 赤田駅（あかだえき）は、富山県富山市赤田にあった富山地方鉄道笹津線の駅（廃駅）である。笹津線の廃線に伴い1975年（昭和50年）4月1日に廃駅となった。 歴史 1914年（大正3年）12月6日 - 富山軽便鉄道堀川新駅（後の南富山駅） - 笹津駅間開通（富山軽便鉄道全通）に伴い蜷川駅（にながわえき）として開業。 1915年（大正4年）10月24日 - 鉄道会社名を富山鉄道に改称。それに伴い同鉄道の駅となる。 1920年（大正9年）12月22日 - 一旦廃止となる。 1950年（昭和25年）9月1日 - 富山地方鉄道笹津線南富山駅 - 大久保町駅間再開通に伴い再開業。旅客のみ取扱い。 1965年（昭和40年）1月1日 - 赤田駅に改称。 1975年（昭和50年）4月1日 - 笹津線の廃線に伴い廃止となる。 駅構造 廃止時点で、単式ホーム1面1線を有する地上駅であった。ホームは線路の東側（地鉄笹津方面に向かって左手側）に存在した。転轍機を持たない棒線駅となっていた。 無人駅となっていた。駅舎は存在しなかった。 富山軽便鉄道（後の富山鉄道）時代の当駅も、停留場として開業していた。 駅周辺 田圃の中に位置した。 国道41号（越中東街道） 富山県道188号東猪谷富山線 北陸自動車道富山インターチェンジ - 当駅廃止後の開業。 土川 駅跡 2007年（平成19年）9月時点では駅跡の特定は困難であり、名残を見つけることは出来なかった。 また、当駅跡附近の線路跡は、1998年（平成10年）時点では当線廃線後に南富山駅 - 日本繊維前駅の間を東西に走る形で開通した国道359号の取付け道路附近から田村町駅跡南側付近までは2車線の舗装道路となっていた。2008年（平成20年）時点でも同様で、当駅跡附近の道路は市道であった。 隣の駅 富山地方鉄道 笹津線 袋駅 - 赤田駅 - 上野駅 脚注 関連項目 日本の鉄道駅一覧 富山市の廃駅 かた 富山地方鉄道の廃駅 1950年開業の鉄道駅 1975年廃止の鉄道駅
__label__ja 長谷部 葉子（はせべ ようこ）は、日本の教育学者、社会起業家。慶應義塾大学環境情報学部准教授。 略歴 東京都出身。自身の不登校、高校・大学受験失敗などの経験から、20代半ばで寺子屋を立ち上げ、教育支援に携わる。35歳で慶應義塾大学環境情報学部に入学し、同大学院政策・メディア研究科修士課程を修了。SFC時代の教え子に作家で社会学者の古市憲寿が居る。 著書 『今、ここを真剣に生きていますか? やりたいことを見つけたいあなたへ』（講談社、2012年） 『「自分」をカタチにする授業』（講談社、2013年） 『子どもの心が聞こえますか?』（マガジンハウス、2013年） 『いくつになっても「いきいきとした自分」でいられる方法』（マガジンハウス、2014年） 脚注 外部リンク 長谷部葉子研究会 日本の女性社会起業家 日本の女性実業家 日本の女性教育学者 慶應義塾大学の教員 慶應義塾大学出身の人物 東京都出身の人物 生年未記載 存命人物
__label__ja サフィ(Safi）は、モロッコの都市。中部海岸に位置し、大西洋に面する。人口284,750人（2004年）。大きな漁港があり、近くのリン鉱山からリン鉱石の積み出しも行われる。それを生かし、缶詰工場やリン酸塩の工場、肥料工場が立ち並び、繊維工業も盛んで、モロッコ有数の工業都市となっている。伝統産業として、陶器の製造でも名高い。 サフィは11世紀に成立し、1488年から1511年まではポルトガルの支配下にあった。第二次世界大戦ではトーチ作戦の上陸地のひとつとなった。 脚注 外部リンク モロッコの都市 アフリカの港町 マラケシュ＝サフィ地方
__label__ja 東広島市立向陽中学校（ひがしひろしましりつ こうようちゅうがっこう）は、広島県東広島市西条町大沢にある公立中学校。 概要 東広島市の南部にある。校区には、広島大学や広島中央サイエンスパークなど産学の拠点がある。また、国道375号や国道486号、JR山陽新幹線東広島駅などがあり、交通の要衝にもなっている。 沿革 学校行事 4月 - 入学式 9月 - 運動会（2015年から体育大会）2022年度6月開催 10月 - 文化祭 12月 - 修学旅行（2年） 3月 - 卒業式 部活動 運動部 野球部 卓球部（女子） 陸上部 剣道部 ソフトテニス部（男子・女子） バレーボール部（男子・女子） 紙野球部（教室野球・男子） 文化部 家庭科部 吹奏楽部 美術部 パソコン部 通学区域 東広島市立板城小学校の学区 東広島市立郷田小学校の学区 東広島市立三永小学校の学区 進学前小学校 東広島市立板城小学校 東広島市立郷田小学校 東広島市立三永小学校 和文化学習 向陽中学校では、和文化学習を推し進めている。2010年の向陽中学校公開研究会では、全校生徒が箏と尺八で宮城道雄作曲「春の海」を演奏した。また、他にも茶道や絵手紙、竹細工、杖道についても学んでいる。 交通 中国JRバス三升原バス停より徒歩5分 主な卒業生 河名真寿斗 - レスリング選手 脚注 関連項目 広島県中学校一覧 外部リンク 東広島市 市立幼稚園・小・中学校 東広島市立向陽中学校 広島県の公立中学校 こうよう 学校記事
__label__ja 寿町（ことぶきちょう）は、愛知県津島市の地名。丁番を持たない単独町名である。 地理 津島市西部に位置する。東は城之越町・高屋敷町、西は上之町・中之町、南は池須町、北は又吉町に接する。 歴史 地名の由来 沿革 1953年（昭和28年） - 津島市大字津島の一部により、同市寿町として成立。 世帯数と人口 2018年（平成30年）1月1日現在の世帯数と人口は以下の通りである。 人口の変遷 国勢調査による人口の推移 学区 市立小・中学校に通う場合、学区は以下の通りとなる。また、公立高等学校に通う場合の学区は以下の通りとなる。 その他 日本郵便 郵便番号 : 496-0829（集配局：津島郵便局）。 脚注 参考文献 関連項目 寿町 (曖昧さ回避) 津島市の町・字 1953年制定の町・字
__label__ja 江崎駅（えさきえき）は、山口県萩市大字下田万にある、西日本旅客鉄道（JR西日本）山陰本線の駅。同県最北端の駅である。 かつては「さんべ」、「ながと」などの急行も停車していたが、1997年3月22日以降は普通列車のみが停車する。 歴史 1928年（昭和3年）3月25日：国有鉄道山陰本線の飯浦駅 - 須佐駅間延伸時に開業。客貨取扱を開始。 1978年（昭和53年）3月1日：貨物取扱を廃止。 1985年（昭和60年）3月14日：荷物扱い廃止。駅員無配置駅となる（簡易委託駅化）。 1987年（昭和62年）4月1日：国鉄分割民営化により、西日本旅客鉄道（JR西日本）の駅となる。 2013年（平成25年）7月28日：豪雨災害により線路が被災し、一時当駅を含む益田駅 - 長門市駅間が運休（※当駅を含む益田駅 - 須佐駅については11月9日に運行再開）。 2017年（平成29年）5月13日：この日から下り列車も旧上りホームに停車するように切り替わる。 駅構造 単式ホーム1面1線を有する地上駅（停留所）。かつては相対式ホーム2面2線を持ち、交換設備を有していたが、老朽化した跨線橋が解体され、駅舎側の旧上りホームのみ使用されている。かつては長門市方に下りホームへの跨線橋が設置されていた。なお、出発信号や場内信号などは撤去されているため、実質棒線駅となっている。 長門鉄道部管理。簡易委託駅であり、午後5時以降は無人となる。駅構内に飲料の自動販売機がある。 利用状況 1日の平均乗車人員は以下の通りである。 駅周辺 港町江崎の外れにある。 隣の駅 西日本旅客鉄道（JR西日本） 山陰本線 飯浦駅 - 江崎駅 - 須佐駅 脚注 関連項目 日本の鉄道駅一覧 日本の都道府県の東西南北端の駅の一覧 外部リンク 萩市の鉄道駅 さき 西日本旅客鉄道の鉄道駅 日本国有鉄道の鉄道駅 1928年開業の鉄道駅 山陰本線 萩市の建築物
__label__ja 高校生の時は毎朝6時に起きていた。
__label__ja ウィキペディアでいつかバイアグラを検索するなんて思ってもみなかったわ。
__label__ja おめでとうございます。
__label__ja あなたの勉強を邪魔しないようにします。
__label__ja あなたは新しいことを勉強したいのだと思った。
__label__ja みんなもそうなのかな、と思うことくらいしかできない。
__label__ja 私は寝なければなりません。
__label__ja 来週には凍るかも知れない。
__label__ja 何かしてみましょう。
__label__ja 君の気付いていない問題がある。
__label__ja 私はいつも不思議な性格の方が好きだった。
__label__ja のろまにはなりたくない。かっこ良くなりたい！！
__label__ja 最悪の場合を考えておこう。
__label__ja そんなことは起きないでしょう。
__label__ja 私は彼らにチケットをもう一枚送ってくれるように頼んだ。
__label__ja 私よりも物知りな数学者が自分のことをはっきりと表現できていないのを見るのは心地の良いものではない。
__label__ja 警察はあなたに弾丸をみつけさせるでしょう。
__label__ja 好きにはなれなかった。
__label__ja すぐに諦めて昼寝をするかも知れない。
__label__ja こんな馬鹿なことは言ったことが無い。
__label__ja もう彼女には言えないよ。そんなに単純なことではなくなってきたからね。
__label__ja 僕が最後に自分の考えを伝えた人は、僕を気違いだと思ったようだ。
__label__ja 違うよ、新しい彼じゃない。
__label__ja これは重要ではない。
__label__ja 失礼に振舞ったりしないのが一番だと思う。
__label__ja 潔白であることは美しいことだ。
__label__ja 彼女は、どうしてそんなことが可能なのかと尋ねている。
__label__ja 自分のかっこ良さをわざと隠すということ？
__label__ja 残念ながらそれは本当なのです。
__label__ja 人間は決して永遠には生きられないものだ。
__label__ja そんなに驚くことじゃないよね？
__label__ja ログアウトするんじゃなかったよ。
__label__ja 私は違います。あなたです。
__label__ja 私は眠らなければなりません。
__label__ja 私はロウソクの灯りって好きだな。
__label__ja 生物学は好きになれません。
__label__ja 時間はいくらでも作れる。
__label__ja 時間があるか分かりません。
__label__ja 答えが分かったんだ、でもあまりにすぐに分かったものだから正解であるはずがないんだ。
__label__ja この世界の教育にはがっかりしてしまう。
__label__ja 傷を付けたのは私だけど、こんなの簡単に直せる傷よ。
__label__ja その後私はそこを出るんだけど、鞄を忘れてきたことに気付くんだ。
__label__ja 理論的には、私は数学をしている。
__label__ja 君は僕にとてもいらいらしている。
__label__ja 私は好奇心が強いです。
__label__ja 日本へ行けたらいいのに。
__label__ja 明日帰ったら電話します。
__label__ja それはあなたが一人になりたくないからです。
__label__ja 僕が君と一緒に住んだことは君の人生観に影響を与えたと思う。
__label__ja こいつは悪いウサギだった。
__label__ja 欲しいものがみつかると、決まって高いものだ。
__label__ja 私ならそう言っただろうと思う。
__label__ja 私は芸術家ではない。全然向いていない。
__label__ja 長い目で見れば違ってくると思います。
__label__ja 誰にも分からないよ。
__label__ja 何が言いたいのか分からないなあ。
__label__ja それがどこから来たのか分からなかった。
__label__ja 痩せる必要がないというのは残念だ。
__label__ja 孤独な人は、他人を恐れるから一人なのだ。
__label__ja たぶん彼にしてみれば同じことよ。
__label__ja もし誰かにこの話の要点は何かって尋ねられても、私はさっぱりわからないわ。
__label__ja 自由について私に話したかったの？
__label__ja ああ、凄く変だなあ・・・。
__label__ja 授業が全然無いとでも言うの？！
__label__ja 謝罪はあったにせよ、私はまだ彼に腹を立てている。
__label__ja 自分勝手にするつもりはない。
__label__ja そんなつもりではなかったんだ。
__label__ja 分からない言葉がたくさんある。
__label__ja 私は一日に100ユーロ稼ぎます。
__label__ja 大抵の人は僕を気違いだと思っている。
__label__ja でも可能性は低そうだね。
__label__ja 今日はもう聞かないよ。
__label__ja きみにちょっとしたものをもってきたよ。
__label__ja 大きくなったら王様になりたい。
__label__ja 私はなぜか夜の方が元気だ。
__label__ja 僕はすごく太ってる。
__label__ja そうしたらひとつ問題があって・・・。
__label__ja 丸一日オンラインで君を見ないなんてびっくりだよ。
__label__ja 歌詞を見てみれば、あまり意味が無いことに気付くでしょう。
__label__ja それで彼らの気が変わったのかも知れない。
__label__ja 驚くことではないね。
__label__ja 君は本当は馬鹿ではない。
__label__ja 兄弟がいるとどんなだろうといつも思う。
__label__ja 君はただ人生の問題から逃げているだけだよ。
__label__ja なぜみんなが私のことを気違いだと思うのか、遂に説明してくれてありがとう。
__label__ja こんなに明らかなことをわざわざどうやって説明したらいいのか分からない。
__label__ja 彼は私を蹴っています！
__label__ja 何と言ったら良いか分かりません。
__label__ja 何と言ったらいいか・・・。
__label__ja 多くの人が日常のことについて文を書く。
__label__ja お誕生日おめでとうムーリエル！
__label__ja もう何をしたらいいか分からない。
__label__ja ムーリエルは２０歳になりました。
__label__ja 私は反社会的かもしれないけれど人と話さないわけではない。
__label__ja 恐い話が聞きたいなら、数週間前に私が見た夢のことを話してあげるよ。
__label__ja それは私の台詞だよ！
__label__eo Ebersbach havas diversajn signifojn: Ebersbach (apud Döbeln) estas ekse memstara komunumo kaj nuna komunumoparto de Döbeln en la distrikto Centra Saksio de la federacia lando Saksio en Germanio. Ebersbach (apud Großenhain) estas komunumo en distrikto Meißen de la federacia lando Saksio en Germanio. Ebersbach an der Fils estas komunumo en distrikto Göppingen de la federacia lando Baden-Virtembergo en Germanio. Ebersbach (Saksio) estas eksa urba komunumo en la distrikto Görlitz de la federacia lando Saksio en Germanio: ekde 2011 temas pri parto de kunigita komunumo Ebersbach-Neugersdorf.
__label__eo Weissenbach estas la nomo de la sekvantaj lokoj: Weissenbach (Sankt-Antoni) estas vilaĝo de la komunumo Sankt-Antoni de la distrikto Sense en Kantono Friburgo en Svislando. Weissenbach (Boltigen) estas vilaĝo de la komunumo Boltigen de la administra distrikto Supra Simme-Valo-Saanen en Kantono Berno en Svislando.
__label__eo Zoltán Kárpáti, laŭ hungarlingve kutima nomordo Kárpáti Zoltán estas hungara pentristo. Zoltán Kárpáti naskiĝis la en Heves (urbo). Biografio Zoltán Kárpáti akiris diplomon pri komputila grafikisto en Eger en 2005. En la sekva jaro li vivis en Anglio, kie liaj pentraĵoj estis ekspoziciitaj. Ekde 2010 li vivas en Balatonfüred. Intertempe li edziĝis, ili aliĝis al la loka arta vivo. Ekde 2012 li kreas artaĵojn el forĵetaĵoj. Lia alia interesa tekniko estas artaĵo per disŝuto de sabloj. El solaj ekspozicioj Heves (2002, 2007) Balatonfüred (2011, 2016) Veszprém (urbo) (2012) El kolektivaj ekspozicioj Balatonfüred (2016) Elektitaj pentraĵoj, grafikaĵoj Parasztház (2007, karbodesegnaĵo) A zongora (2006, pentraĵo) Rejtőzködő szarvasok (2006, sablaĵo) vidu la malsuprajn bildojn! Fontoj hungarlingva membiografio Hungaraj pentristoj
__label__eo Canaries estas distrikto de Sankta Lucio situanta okcidente de la lando, kun loĝantoj. Ĝi apenaŭ havas . Ĉi tiu distrikto produktas gravajn enspezojn al la landa ekonomio, pere de la fiŝkaptado kaj la havenoj. Distriktoj de Sankta Lucio
__label__eo En matematika fako abstrakta algebro, la nula modulo aŭ, pli kutime, nul-modulo aŭ nulmodulo estas la modulo konsistanta el nur nulo, t.e. nul-elemento, adicia neŭtrala elemento. Demonstri, ke la nula modulo efektive estas modulo, estas simple: ĝi estas triviale fermita rilate al adicio kaj al modula "skalara" multipliko; kaj kontroli, ke ĉiuj aksiomoj validas, estas facilege. Modulo-teorio en:Zero element#Zero module
__label__eo Zerfaliu estas komunumo de Italio. La komunumo apartenas al la insulo kaj administra regiono Sardio kaj al la provinco Oristano. Fine de en la komunumo vivis . Kristana patroneco estas la festo Transfiguriĝo, kies memortago sekve estas la komunuma festotago. Najbaraj komunumoj estas . Eksteraj ligiloj () Komunumoj de Italio Komunumoj de Sardio Komunumoj de Provinco Oristano
__label__eo GÁSPÁR János (ga:ŝpa:r) estis hungara pedagogo, lernolibroverkisto naskita en Torockószentgyörgy la 27-an de oktobro 1816 kaj mortinta en Nagyenyed la 6-an de marto 1892. Biografio János Gáspár studis en Nadjenjedo. Inter 1844 kaj 1856 li estis ĉefamilia instruisto ĉe la familio Zeyk, per kies helpo li pristudis pedagogion inter 1841–1844 en Berlin. Inter 1856 kaj 1868 li instruis en Nagyenyed, li estis direktoro, ekde 1868 lernejinspektoro. Li redaktis plurajn bazlenejajn lernolibrojn. Lia ĉefverko aperis en pluraj eldonaĵoj. Li uzis la folkloron en instruado. Verkoj Csemegék olvasni még nem tudó gyermekek számára (Kolozsvár, 1848). Fonto Magyar Életrajzi Lexikon Gaspar, J
__label__eo 11432 Kerkhoven estas asteroido de la asteroida zono, malkovrita la de la usona astronomo Tom Gehrels, de la Observatorio de la Monto Palomar kaj de la nederlandaj geastronomoj kaj geedzoj Ingrid van Houten-Groeneveld kaj Cornelis Johannes van Houten, de la Observatorio de Leiden (Nederlando) en la kadro de la "Dua Enketo pri Trojanoj" (). Nomo Ĝi estis nomita en memoro de Rudolf Albert Kerkhoven (1879–1940), notinda nederlanda plantejestro de teo en Malabar (Okcidenta Javo). Kun sia onklo Karel Albert Rudolf Bosscha, li grave kontribuis al la starigo de astronomia observatorio en Lembang, proksime de Bandungo. Lia heredaĵo daŭre subtenas la astronomian esploron en Indonezio kaj Nederlando. Eksteraj ligiloj Asteroidoj de la ĉefa zono Malkovrita de Cornelis Johannes van Houten Malkovrita de Tom Gehrels Malkovrita de Ingrid van Houten-Groeneveld Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 1973
__label__eo La vulkana cindro estas komuna nomo de ŝtoneroj, elŝprucitaj el vulkana kratero kaj kiuj estas malpli grandaj ol ĉ. 2 mm. Dum la erupcio, super la vulkano formiĝas erupcia kolono el cindro, gasoj kaj vaporoj. Okaze de kuncementiĝo, estiĝas tufo. La vulkana cindro - male al cindro de la simpla brulado, kiu estas mola kaj malpeza - estas dura kaj peza. Ĝi ne solviĝas en la akvo kaj bone kondukas la elektrecon en akva stato. La plej detrua formo de la vulkana cindro estas la piroklasta fluo, kiu estiĝas post kolapso de la erupcia kolono. Ĝi estas lavino el varmega cindro, gasoj kaj aliaj ŝtonaĵoj. La vulkana cindro estas danĝera okaze de enspirado, ĉar povas koaguli en la pulmo. Pro ties kruda surfaco, ĝi iritas kaj és gratas surfacon de la okuloj. La vulkana cindro estas ankaŭ granda danĝero por aviadiloj, ĉar la etaj grajneroj povas ĝeni funkciadon de la motoroj. Vidu ankaŭ Pucolano Vulkanologio
__label__eo Boe estas distrikto kaj elektodistrikto de Nauro. Laŭ Paul Hambruch, "boe" signifas "leo". La distrikto Boe troviĝas laŭ la sud-okcidenta bordo de la insulo; ĝi estas banata de la Pacifika Oceano kaj najbaras al la distriktoj Aiwo, Buada kaj Jareno. Ĝi havas loĝantaron de proksimume 800 loĝantoj kaj surfacon de 0,66 km² (per tio ĝi estas la plej malgranda distrikto de la ŝtato). La elektodistrikto de Boe elektas 2 anojn al la Parlamento de Nauro. Distriktoj de Nauro Elektodistriktoj de Nauro
__label__eo NGC 1072 (aliaj indikoj — IC 1837, PGC 10315, IRAS02409+0005, UGC 2208, ZWG 388.103, MCG 0-7-88, ZWG 389.1, KUG 0240+000) estas galaksio en konstelacio Baleno. Ĉi tiu objekto estis jam en la originala versio de NGC-katalogo. Vidu ankaŭ Messier-katalogo NGC-katalogo Eksteraj ligiloj 1072 Baleno (konstelacio) Galaksioj
__label__eo Troparjovo () havas diversajn signifojn: Troparjovo estas iama vilaĝo, akceptita al Moskvo en 1960; Troparjovo estas municipo de Moskvo, ekzistinta dum 1991 — 1993; Troparjovo estas stacio de la Metroo de Moskvo; Troparjovo estas vilaĝo en Moskva provinco. Vidu ankaŭ Troparjovo-Nikulino (distrikto de Moskvo)
__label__eo Věžnička () estas municipo en Ĉeĥio, en Bohemio en distrikto Jihlava, regiono Vysočina. En la jaro vivis ĉi tie . Historio La unua skribmencio pri la municipo devenas el la jaro 1502. Loĝantaro Memorindaĵoj Malnovaj keloj, la tn. loĥoj estas kavigitaj en la tero en deklivo kaj ili troviĝas plejparte en vilaĝplaco ĉirkaŭ la ĉefa ŝoseo. Pentaj krucoj kun alteco 92 cm, larĝeco 55 kaj dikeco 18 cm elstaras en arbaro unu kilometro nordokcidente de la municipo kaj proksimume 500 metroj de rojo Jamenský potok. Temas pri kruca ŝtono kun misteraj simboloj, kiuj ĝis nun restas nesolvitaj. Sur la ŝtono estas ĉizita reliefa svastika kruco, kiu havas sub aloj du ujojn. Laŭ mito ĉi tie estis mortigita virino kun dorsosako, alia mito rakontas pri perforta morto de barelfaristo. Kapeleto Personecoj Anežka Hrůzová (1879–1899), kudristino kaj viktimo de murdo Jan Bezděk (1858–1915), mikologo kaj botanikisto, li instruis ĉi tie en la jaroj 1882–1886 Pluaj fotoj Referencoj Municipoj en distrikto Jihlava Vilaĝoj en distrikto Jihlava Setlejoj en Křižanova montetaro
__label__eo estas komunumo de Francio. Ĝi situas en la departemento Haute-Saône (prononco [], , arpitane Hiôta-Sona), en la regiono Burgonjo-Franĉkonteo (, prononco []) kaj en la historia regiono Franĉkonteo. Fine de en la komunumo vivis . Administre la komunumo apartenas al la arondismento Vesoul (france arrondissement de Vesoul), la suda kaj okcidenta parto de la departemento, kaj al la kantono . Vidu ankaŭ komunumoj de Haute-Saône Komunumoj de Haute-Saône
__label__eo Ĉapmana Universitato () estas privata universitato situanta en Orange (Kalifornio), Usono, aligita kun la Kristana Eklezio (Disĉiploj de Kristo). Konata pro sia propono de artaj kaj profesiaj programoj, la Ĉapmana Universitato enhavas sep altlernejojn kaj kolegiojn: nome Lawrence and Kristina Dodge College of Film and Media Arts, Wilkinson College of Humanities and Social Sciences, George L. Argyros School of Business and Economics, Schmid College of Science, College of Performing Arts, Jura Altlernejo kaj College of Educational Studies. Por la lernojaro 2010-2011, la Ĉapmana Universitato gastigis 6,398 studentojn. Referencoj Universitatoj en Usono
__label__eo (jen france kaj okcitane) estas komunumo de Francio. Ĝi situas en la departemento Marbordaj Alpoj (france Alpes-Maritimes, okcitane Aups Maritims), en la regiono Provenco-Alpoj-Bordo Lazura ( ). Fine de en la komunumo vivis . Administre la komunumo apartenas al la arondismento Nico kaj al la kantono . Eksteraj ligiloj () Vidu ankaŭ komunumoj de Alpes-Maritimes Komunumoj de Alpes-Maritimes
__label__eo La malnova tjurka lingvaro (ankaŭ orienta malnovtjurka lingvo, orĥona tjurka lingvo aŭ malnova ujgura) estas la plej frua atestita formo de la tjurkaj lingvoj, trovita en surskriboj de historiaj ĥanlandoj de la gokturkoj kaj ujguroj devenantaj de proksimume al la 8-a ĝis la 13-a jarcentoj. Ĝi estas la plej aĝa atestita parto de la siberia tjurka branĉo de la tjurka lingvaro, kiu pluekzistas en la moderna okcidenta ujgura lingvo. Ĝi ne estas la prapatro de la ujgura lingvo; la samtempa praulo de la ujgura nomiĝas meztjurka, poste la ĉagataja aŭ malnov-uzbeka. La malnova tjurka lingvo estas atestita en kelkaj skriboj, inkluzive de la malnova tjurka skribo, la malnova ujgura alfabeto (formo de la sogdia alfabeto), la brahmia skribsistemo kaj la maniĥea skribo. La titolo klare indikas, ke la nomo malnova tjurka lingvaro kutime rilatas ne al ununura lingvo, sed kolektive al la proksime rilataj kaj reciproke kompreneblaj stadioj de diversaj komunaj tjurkaj lingvoj parolataj dum la malfrua unua jarmilo. Tjurka lingvaro
__label__eo 100734 Annasvídnická estas asteroido de la ĉefa asteroida zono malkovrita la de la ĉeĥa astronomo Miloš Tichý elde la Observatorio Kleť, proksime de České Budějovice en Ĉeĥa Respubliko. Nomo Ĝi estis nomita en memoro de Anna Svídnická (aŭ Anna de Schweidnitz, 1339–1362), tria edzino de la Sankta Romia Imperiestro kaj Reĝo de Bohemio Karolo la 4-a. En 1361, ŝi naskis la deziritan sukcedonton al la trono, la ontan Reĝon de Bohemio Venceslaon la 4-a. Eksteraj ligiloj Asteroidoj de la ĉefa zono Malkovrita en observatorio Kleť Malkovrita de Miloš Tichý Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 1998
__label__eo Lokomotiv-Perovo () estas futbala stadiono en Moskvo, ĉefa stadiono de klubo Lokomotiv-2 Moskvo. Ĝi situas en parko Perovo (laŭ adreso: Lazo-strato, 17A). Ĝi havas 1300 lokojn. Historio La stadiono estis konstruita en 1940-aj jaroj sur teritorio de la parko plej damaĝita pro bombado dum la Dua mondmilito. Referencoj Stadionoj en Moskvo Distrikto Perovo (Moskvo) Aperis en 1940-1949 Perovo Futbalo en Moskvo Futbalaj stadionoj
__label__eo Asteriks kaj Obeliks: Je servo de sia reĝa moŝto (france Astérix & Obélix: Au service de Sa Majesté, la titolo aludas al filmo de 1969 pri la brita agento James Bond), reĝisorita de Laurent Tirard, estas la kvara realaktora kinfilma adapto de la aventuroj de Asteriks post Asteriks kaj Obeliks kontraŭ Cezaro (1999), Asteriks kaj Obeliks: Misio Kleopatra (2002), kaj Asteriks ĉe la olimpiaj ludoj (2008). La filmo estas adaptita al tridimensia prezento kaj ĝi tutmonde premieris en septembro 2012. La filma enhavo estas bazita sur la bildstrioj Asteriks en Britio (1965) kaj Asteriks kaj la normanoj (1966). Intrigo Julio Cezaro alteriĝas kun sia armeo en Britio kaj rapide transformas la insulon al nova romia provinco Britannia. Nur la anoj de malgranda vilaĝo ankoraŭ kuraĝe defendas sin kontraŭ la romaj legioj. Sed la situacio iĝas kriza kaj la vilaĝanoj ne havas multan tempon por vivi; tiam Jolitorax, unu el la vilaĝanoj, kun volontuloj iras serĉi helpon ĉe sia duonkuzo Asteriks la Gaŭlo kaj revenigi barelon de "magia eliksiro" el la bretona vilaĝo de la nevenkeblaj herooj. Francaj komediaj filmoj Filmoj aperintaj en 2012 Filmoj adaptitaj de bildlibroj Asteriks
__label__eo N-Alilacetamido aŭ acetilalilamino estas organika kombinaĵo konsistanta je unu alila grupo kaj alia acetila grupo ambaŭ ligitaj al nitrogenatomo. Ĝi estas sekundara amido, senkolora likvaĵo, solvebla en akvo, etanolo, acetono, kloroformo kaj benzeno. Alilacetamido estas brulema substanco neakordigebla kun forta oksidigagentoj. Alilacetamidoj posedas antifungajn kaj antioksidigajn proprecojn. Reakcioj Reakcio 1 Preparado de n-alilacetamido per traktado de n-alila acetato kun alilamino: Reakcio 2 Preparado de n-alilacetamido per traktado de alilamino kun acetila klorido: Reakcio 3 Preparado de N-alilacetamido per traktado de acetamido kun alila klorido: Reakcio 4 Preparado de n-alilacetamido per traktado de akroleino kun kloro-etilamino: Reakcio 5 Preparado de N-Alilacetamido per traktado de propileno kun N-kloro-acetamido: Vidu ankaŭ Amidoj Referencoj Amidoj
__label__eo József Maklári [jOĵef], laŭ hungarlingve kutima nomordo Maklári József estis hungara korusestro, muziklerneja kaj altlerneja instruisto, fondinta membro de Societo Ferenc Liszt. József Maklári naskiĝis la en Vác, li mortis la en Budapeŝto. Biografio József Maklári frekventis piaristan gimnazion en sia naskiĝurbo, poste li akiris diplomon en Muzikarta Altlernejo Ferenc Liszt en 1950. Liaj plej gravaj instruistoj estis Lajos Bárdos, Zoltán Vásárhelyi, Alajos Werner, Artúr Harmat, Zoltán Gárdonyi kaj Bence Szabolcsi. Intertempe en 1942 li fondis koruson en Vác, kiun li gvidis ĝismorte. Inter 1949 kaj 1957 li estis kapelmajstro de alia koruso, inter 1957-1962 li instruis en muziklernejo, poste li havis statuson en instituto, inter 1967-1993 li instruis en la Muzikarta Altlernejo, poste li pensiuliĝis. Li ricevis kelkajn premiojn, la lastan jam postmorte. Ankaŭ liaj korusoj ricevis premiojn. Memorigiloj memortabulo en Vác (2004) Fontoj hungarlingva biografio kun foto hungarlingva biografieto (la koncerna teksto estas legebla pli malsupre) Referencoj Hungaraj korusestroj Hungaraj altlernejaj instruistoj Hungaraj instruistoj Budapeŝtanoj Hungaraj kapelmajstroj
__label__eo NGC 5873 (aliaj indikoj — PK 331+16.1, ESO 328-PN34) estas planeduma nebulozo en konstelacio Lupo. Ĉi tiu objekto estis jam en la originala versio de NGC-katalogo. Vidu ankaŭ Messier-katalogo NGC-katalogo Eksteraj ligiloj 5873 Lupo (konstelacio) Planedumaj nebulozoj
__label__eo {{DISPLAYTITLE: (8570) 1996 TN10}} (8570) 1996 TN10 estas asteroido de la asteroida zono, malkovrita la de la japanaj astronomoj Sejĝi Ueda kaj Hiroŝi Kaneda elde la observatorio de Kuŝiro en Hokajdo (Japanio). Eksteraj ligiloj Asteroidoj de la ĉefa zono Malkovrita de Hiroŝi Kaneda Malkovrita de Sejĝi Ueda Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 1996
__label__eo Ruĝa Flago - ĉine 红旗, pinjine Hongqi - estis influa ĉinlingva magazino, kiu ekde junio 1958 ĝis majo 1988 aperis en Pekino. Ĝi estis unu el la organoj de la Komunista Partio de Ĉinio, kaj ties centra komitato estis la eldonisto. Aparte en la 1960-aj jaroj, iuj ĉefartikoloj de la gazeto pere de la Fremdlingva Eldonejo Pekino aperis ankaŭ libroforme en Esperanto; kaj iujn politikajn publikaĵojn kune verkis la redakcioj de la periodaĵo Ruĝa Flago kaj de la sampartia taggazeto Renmin Ribao. La periodaĵo havis signife maoisman profilom, antaŭ kaj ne malpli sub la Kultura Revolucio. La nomo kompreneble estas aludo kaj al la ruĝa flago kiel simbolo de komunismo respektive de la laborista klaso ĝenerale kaj al la ŝtata flago de Ĉinio konkrete. Ĝi finiĝis en 1988 dum la rega epoko de la ĉina ŝtatestro Deng Xiaoping kaj estis anstataŭita per nova publikaĵo nomata Qiushi. Ĉinaj gazetoj Ĉinlingvaj gazetoj
__label__eo 24641 Enver estas asteroido de la ĉefa asteroida zono malkovrita la de la ukraina astronomino Ljudmila Georgijevna Karaĉkina elde la Krimea astrofizika observatorio de Nauĉno (en tiama Sovetunio, nun en Rusio). Nomo Ĝi estis nomita en honoro de Enver Elimdarovich Abduraimov, kuracisto en Krimeo, fama pro lia sindonema helpo al invalidaj infanoj. Eksteraj ligiloj Asteroidoj de la ĉefa zono Malkovrita de Ljudmila Georgijevna Karaĉkina Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 1983
__label__eo La Parko Uhuru estas 12.9 hektarojn distra parko apuda al la centra negoca distrikto de Najrobio, Kenjo. Ĝi malfermiĝis al la ĝenerala publiko fare de la lasta "Mzee" Jomo Kenyatta la 23an de Majo 1969. Ĝi enhavas artefaritan lagon, kelkajn naciajn monumentojn, kaj kunvenejon kiu iĝis populara celo de sketado. Krom sketado, la kunvenejo estas uzata por porokazaj politikaj kaj religiaj kunvenoj. Historio Ĝi fifamis kiel la loko kie protestoj kontraŭ eksterleĝa terkaptado estis perforte subpremataj de la Moi reĝimo. En 2021, la parko iĝis celo de debato pro klopodira plinovigo kiu inkludis forigon de malnovaj arboj. Nacia tribunalo haltigis la projekton pro mediprotektaj tialoj. En 1989, Wangari Maathai kaj multaj ŝiaj sekvantoj protestis en la parko, klopodante haltigi la konstruadon de 60-etaĝa negocejo de Kenya Times Media Trust. Ŝi estis devigita de la registaro forlasi sian oficejon kaj estis humiligita en la parlamento, sed ŝiaj protestoj kaj la reago de la registaro kondukis al eksterlandaj investantoj nuligi la projekton. Bildaro Referencoj Turismo en Kenjo Najrobio Parkoj en Afriko
__label__eo MCOT HD estas tajlanda senpaga televida reto lanĉita en la 6a de Septembro 1954 kaj per formalaj elsendoj la 24an de junio 1955; ĝi estas posedata de MCOT. La elsendoj iĝis ĉiutagaj en 1957. Emblemoj Eksteraj ligiloj Oficiala retejo de MCOT HD Televidkanaloj en Tajlando
__label__eo Béla KROMER rumania hungara grafikisto. Li naskiĝis en Torda en 1941. Kariero Béla Kromer studis en Arta Akademio de Bukareŝto. Fonto Biografiaj indikoj rumanujaj hungaraj pentristoj kaj grafikistoj
__label__eo Pouzolles (jen france, ) estas komunumo de Francio. Ĝi situas en la departemento Hérault, en la regiono Okcitanio ( [ɔksitaˈni], [utsiˈtanjɔ], [uksiˈtanjə]). Fine de en la komunumo vivis . Eksteraj ligiloj () Vidu ankaŭ komunumoj de Hérault Komunumoj de Hérault
__label__eo (jen france, origine germane kaj alemane Alt-Pfirt, prononco ) estas komunumo de Francio. Ĝi situas en la departemento Haut-Rhin, en la historia kultura regiono Alzaco kaj la nuna administra regiono Grand Est ("Granda Oriento"), kaj administre apartenas al la arondismento kaj kantono Altkirch. Fine de en la komunumo vivis . Vidu ankaŭ komunumoj de Haut-Rhin Komunumoj de Haut-Rhin
__label__eo Therese GIEHSE [tereze gize] (naskiĝis la 6-an de marto, 1898, mortis la 3-an de marto, 1975) estis germana aktorino. Therese Giehse naskiĝis en Munkeno. De 1925 ĝis 1933 kaj ŝi laboris por la Münchner Kammerspiele. En la jaro 1933 ŝi kune kun Erika Mann fondis la kabaredon Die Pfeffermühle, kiu tamen mallonge poste pro la politika situacio en Germanio nur eksterlande povis turnei. Post la Dua mondmilito Therese Gift laboris kun Bertolt Brecht en Zuriko kaj Berlino. Krom en teatraĵoj de Brecht (i.a. kiel Mutter Courage) ŝi brilis en dramoj verkitaj de Gerhart Hauptmann, Henrik Ibsen, Friedrich Dürrenmatt kaj Maksim Gorkij. En filmoj ŝi malofte aperis, sed menciindaj estas Mädchen in Uniform (Germanio, 1958) kaj Lacombe Lucien (Germanio/Francio/Italio, 1973). Ŝi mortis en Munkeno. Germanaj aktoroj
__label__eo 12974 Haliterso estas troja asteroido de Jupitero, kiu orbitas ĉe la punkto de Lagrange L4 de la sistemo Suno-Jupitero, en la tiel nomata "Greka Tendaro". Malkovro Ĝi estis fotita la de la usona astronomo Tom Gehrels, elde la Observatorio de la Monto Palomar (Usono) kaj malkovrita de la nederlandaj geedzoj geastronomoj Ingrid van Houten-Groeneveld kaj Cornelis Johannes van Houten, de la Observatorio de Leiden (Nederlando), sur la senditaj en Leiden. Nomo Ĝi ricevis la nomon de Haliterso (malnovgreke Αλιθέρσης), aŭguristo en Itako. Li iris kune kun Telemako serĉi Odiseon. Li ankaŭ estis amiko de Odiseo mem. Notoj kaj referencoj Eksteraj ligiloj Trojaj asteroidoj Malkovrita de Cornelis Johannes van Houten Malkovrita de Tom Gehrels Malkovrita de Ingrid van Houten-Groeneveld Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 1973
__label__eo La akaĵuarbo aŭ okcidenta anakardio (Anacardium occidentale) estas daŭrafolia arbo kultivata kaj naturigita en multaj tropikaj landoj, pro tio ke ambaŭ partoj de la ŝajnfrukto estas manĝeblaj. Vidu ankaŭ Akaĵuo Anakardiacoj Neotropisa flaŭro Arboj de Brazilo Kuracplantoj Tropika agrikulturo
__label__eo Hidraŭlika regelemento estas speco de hidraŭlika mekanismo. Temas pri cirkvitero ebliganta regadon de flu-kvanto aŭ premo, aŭ de ambaŭ parametroj de likvo aŭ direktanta fluon de likvo. Eblas la sekva diferencigo: Hidraŭlika regelemento por senpera alkonekto de tubkondukiloj havas en sia korpo aperturojn por enŝraŭbi tubjuntilojn. Hidraŭlika regelemento por staka muntado havas du paralelajn kontraŭpoziciajn ebenajn facojn kun kanaloj kaj necesaj aperturoj por bolta kunfikso, destinita por muntado en stakon kun aliaj tiuspecaj regelementoj apartenantaj al la sama cirkvito. La plej malsupra regelemento estas muntata sur subplaton, al kiu estas alkonektitaj komunaj enira kaj returna kondukiloj. Sur la plej supran regelementon oni laŭbezone muntas ferman platon. Hidraŭlika regelemento kun subplato estas hidraŭlika regelemento, kies ĉiuj kanaloj eliras el unu ebena faco, per kiu ĝi estas muntita sur subplaton, kies aperturoj kongruas kun la elirejoj de la kanaloj. Al la subplato estas konektitaj ĉiuj necesaj tubkondukiloj. Hidraŭlika regelemento por bateria muntado estas hidraŭlika regelemento por bateria muntado. Hidraŭliko
__label__eo József Kürschák [jOĵef kurŝAk], laŭ hungarlingve kutima nomordo Kürschák József estis hungara matematikisto, profesoro, instruisto, membro ordinara de Hungara Scienca Akademio (1914). József Kürschák naskiĝis la 1864 en Buda. Li mortis la 1933 en Budapeŝto. Biografio József Kürschák frekventis universitaton en Budapeŝto inter 1881-1886, kie li lernis precipe de Gyula Kőnig kaj Jenő Hunyady. Li ekinstruis en diversaj lernejoj en Debrecen, poste en Budapeŝto. En 1891 li instruis jam en la universitato, kie li estis ankaŭ rektoro kaj katedrestro. Li okupiĝis precipe pri algebro, ekzemple pri diferenciala ekvacio. Verkaro (elekto) A körmérés története és elmélete (1892) Az általánosított kinetikai potenciál létezésének feltételei (1905) Propriétés générales des corps des variétés algébriques in: (1910) Irreduzible Formen (1922) Egy analitikus geometriai determináns irreducibilitása (1931) Fontoj hungarlingva biografio Hungaraj matematikistoj Hungaraj profesoroj Hungaraj akademianoj Budapeŝtanoj Hungaraj instruistoj
__label__eo De Akkers estas la finstacio en la nederlanda urbo Spijkenisse de linioj C kaj D. Ĝi estas unu el la tri stacioj de metroo de Roterdamo en Spijkenisse. Sub (kaj enkonstruita) la metrostacio estas la butikcentro Akkerhof. La stacio estis malfermita la fare de la tiama Ministro de Transporto, Publika konstrulaboro kaj Mastrumado de akvo Neelie Smit-Kroes. En 2003, la stacio spertis renovigadon, donante al la stacio pli modernan kaj pli malpezan aspekton. Mapo Vidu ankaŭ Metroo de Roterdamo Linio A (metroo de Roterdamo) Linio B (metroo de Roterdamo) Linio C (metroo de Roterdamo) Linio D (metroo de Roterdamo) Linio E (metroo de Roterdamo) Roterdamo Spijkenisse Eksteraj ligiloj (RET) Stacioj de la metroo de Roterdamo Metrostacioj malfermitaj en 1985 1985 en Nederlando
__label__eo estas komunumo de Italio. Ĝi situas en la provinco Asti de la regiono Piemonto. Fine de en la komunumo vivis . Kristana patrono estas la sanktulino Maria Magdala, kies memortago sekve estas la komunuma festotago. Najbaras la komunumoj . Eksteraj ligiloj () Aldonu bonan bildon, se vi povas! Komunumoj de Italio Komunumoj de Piemonto Komunumoj de Provinco Asti
__label__eo Meijersplein, plennome Meijersplein / Airport estas metrostacio sur de RandstadRail kaj metroo de Roterdamo. La stacio situas sur Asserweg, proksime de Meijersplein en la Roterdama kvartalo Schiebroek. La stacio malfermiĝis la , anstataŭante stacion Wilgenplas. Ĉi tiu ŝanĝo estis elektita ĉar la nova loko estas oportune situanta proksime de la estonta loĝkvartalo Polder Zestienhoven kaj de Flughaveno Roterdamo-Hago. Mapo Vidu ankaŭ Metroo de Roterdamo Linio A (metroo de Roterdamo) Linio B (metroo de Roterdamo) Linio C (metroo de Roterdamo) Linio D (metroo de Roterdamo) Linio E (metroo de Roterdamo) Roterdamo Flughaveno Roterdamo-Hago Eksteraj ligiloj (RET) Stacioj de la metroo de Roterdamo Metrostacioj malfermitaj en 2010 2010 en Nederlando
__label__eo Zoltán Bán, laŭ hungarlingve kutima nomordo Bán Zoltán estis hungara komikisto, redaktoro. Lia origina familia nomo estis Beck. Zoltán Bán naskiĝis la en Budapeŝto, li mortis la en Budapeŝto. Biografio Zoltán Bán komencis sian aktoran karieron en Sopron en 1933, samtempe li estis ankaŭ redaktoro ĉe gazeto. Dum la 2-a mondmilito li estis trudlaboristo. Depost 1945 li denove estis redaktoro jam en Budapeŝto, ekde 1953 komikisto. Li laboris en kabaredo, Hungara Radio, Hungara Televizio, produktejo de filmoj. Li emeritiĝis en 1976, tamen li ricevis plu komikistajn rolojn. Li ricevis premiojn en 1976 kaj 1996. Liaj teatraj roloj (elekto) Endre Nagy (verkisto): A miniszterelnök - gazetvendisto Ferenc Molnár: A doktor úr - 2-a policano Károly Nóti-István Zágon: Hyppolit, la lakeo - kuiristo Liaj filmaj roloj (elekto) Bogáncs (1959) - spektaklanto Patyolat akció (1965) - piloto Szerelem (1971) - hararisto Cha-Cha-Cha (1982) - vendisto Frici, a vállalkozó szellem (1993) - vendisto Fontoj hungarlingva biografio Referencoj Hungaraj komikistoj Hungaraj redaktoroj Budapeŝtanoj
__label__eo La klubo GNK Dinamo Zagreb (oficiala nomo Građanski nogometni klub Dinamo Zagreb) estas futbalklubo el la zagreba urbodistrikto Maksimir kaj pro sia nombro de proksimume 11 000 membroj konsideratas esti unu el la signifaj kluboj de Kroatio. La klubo Dinamo Zagreb konatas precipe pro sia junulara sporta trejnado, kiu alportis al ĝi la renomon esti "forĝejo de novaj talentoj". Inter la futbalistoj, kiuj en junulaj jaroj trejniĝis en la klubo, estas ekzemple Zvonimir Boban, Davor Šuker, Dario Šimić aŭ Mark Viduka, kaj pli aktuale Luka Modrić, Vedran Ćorluka kaj Eduardo Alves da Silva. Krom multaj ĉampionaj titoloj kaj pokalaj venkoj en Kroatio kaj en la eksa Jugoslavio, la gajno de la UEFA-pokalo de 1967 konsideratas plej granda sukceso en la kluba historio. Hejma stadiono en la unua duono de la 20-a jarcento estis ejo ĉe la avenuo Koturaška cesta, antaŭ ol oni en 1948 en la stadionom Maksimir, kie la hejmaj matĉoj de la klubo Dinamo Zagreb okazas ĝis nun. Eksteraj ligiloj oficiala kluba retejo (kroate kaj angle) oficiala paĝo en la retejo Facebook oficiala paĝo en la retejo Twitter oficiala paĝo en la retejo YouTube Zagrebo Zagreb Futbalteamoj fonditaj en 1911
__label__eo Gloucestershire (Glosterŝiro) estas unu el la graflandoj de Anglio. Ĝi situas en la regiono sudokcidenta Anglio. La ĉefurbo estas Gloucester. Loĝantaro - (j. 2000). Areo - Industrio - agrikulturo, frukto, inĝenier-arto. Urboj kaj vilaĝoj Bibury Bildaro Urbo Gloucester Tewkesbury Cheltenham Cotswold Stroud Forest of Dean South Gloucestershire Graflandoj de Anglio
__label__eo Sir Robert Ker Porter, (1777-1842) estis skota artisto, aŭtoro, diplomato kaj vojaĝanto. Nuntempe konata pro siaj rakontoj pri siaj vojaĝoj en Rusio, Hispanio kaj Persio, li estis unu el la plej fruaj panoramaj pentristoj en Britio, kaj nomiĝis historia pentristo de Caro Aleksandro la 1-a kaj servis kiel brita konsulo en Venezuelo. Skotdevenaj angloj britaj pentristoj britaj diplomatoj Britaj ambasadoroj en Venezuelo Esploristoj de Irano
__label__eo KIRKÓSA Júlia [kirko'ŝa] estas rumanuja hungara operkantistino (soprano) naskiĝinta la 10-an de julio 1947 en Szamosújvár. Ŝi estas la edzino de operkantisto Sándor Köpeczi. Biografio Júlia Kirkósa studis kanton en la muzikakademio de Kluĵo. Ekde 1973 ŝi estis anino de la Kolozsvári Állami Magyar Opera. Ŝi havis sukceson ankaŭ en Hungarujo en Győr kaj en 1992 en Margitszigeti Szabadtéri Színpad. Roloj ĉefaj Amália (Verdi: Az álarcosbál [Un ballo in maschera]); Erzsébet (Verdi: Don Carlos); Erzsébet (Wagner: Tannhäuser); Donna Anna, Donna Elvira (Mozart: Don Giovanni); Tosca (Puccini); Amelia (Verdi: Simone Boccanegra). Eksteraj ligiloj Pliaj spektakloj: Fonto Magyar Színházművészeti Lexikon Rumanujaj hungaraj operkantistoj
__label__eo 14479 Plekhanov estas asteroido de la asteroida zono, malkovrita la de la belga astronomo Eric Walter Elst elde la Observatorio La Silla en Ĉilio. Nomo Ĝia nomo estis erare skribita 14479 Plekanov antaŭ estis reĝustigita. Tiu nomo honoras la sovetunian scienciston Gennadij Fjodoroviĉ Pleĥanov (cirile : Геннадий Фёдорович Плеханов) de la Tomska Ŝtata Universitato, kiu de 30 jaroj kondukis sciencajn enketojn ĉe la situejo de la evento de Tungusko proksime de Vanavara. En julio 1995, la malkovrito akompanis lin en ekskurso al la loko de la eksplodo de Tungusko. Notoj kaj referencoj Eksteraj ligiloj Asteroidoj de la ĉefa zono Malkovrita de Eric Walter Elst Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 1994
__label__eo Escamps estas franca komunumo lokita en la departemento Yonne kaj en la regiono Burgonjo. Ĝi havis 812 loĝantojn laŭ censo plenumita en 2008. Geografio Escamps etendiĝas sur 22.21 km², kaj havis 812 loĝantojn laŭ la lasta oficiala censo. La komunumo situas en Yonne, en la nordokcidenta parto de Burgonjo. Historio La departemento Yonne estis oficiale kreita la 4-an de marto 1790 dum la franca revolucio. Okaze de la municipa baloto de 2008 venkis en la komunumo S-ro Christian Chaton, kiu do fariĝis la loka urbestro. Monumentoj La kastelo Avigneau (france château d'Avigneau) situas 2,5 kilometrojn for de la vilaĝo, en samnoma vilaĝeto. Ĝi estas hodiaŭ privata domo kaj datiĝas de la renesanca periodo. Administrado Escamps apartenas al la kantono de Coulanges-la-Vineuse, kies ĉefurbo estas Coulanges-la-Vineuse. Tiu kantono mem estas parto de la arondismento de Auxerre, unu el la tri arondismentoj de la departemento Yonne. Vidu ankaŭ Komunumoj de Yonne Kantono de Coulanges-la-Vineuse Komunumoj de Yonne
__label__eo Gallegos de Altamiros [gaLJEgos dealtaMIros] estas municipo en la centro de la provinco Avilo, en la regiono Kastilio-Leono, Hispanio. Ĝi apartenas al Komarko de Avilo kaj al la jurisdikcia teritorio de Avilo, en la centro de la provinco. Geografio Ĝia municipa teritorio estas formata de stá formado por du loĝlokoj: nome Gallegos kaj Altamiros; la municipo okupas totalan areon de 20 km² kaj laŭ la demografia informo de la municipa censo fare de la INE en 2021, ĝi havis 63 loĝantojn. Ĝi perdis 600 loĝantojn el la mezo de la 20-a jarcento pro migrado al urbaj areoj. Ĝi distas 25 km de Avilo, provinca ĉefurbo. Ĝi limas kun Brabos, Villaflor, Bularros, Chamartín, Sanchorreja kaj Narrillos del Rebollar. Historio En Mezepoko okazis reloĝado. La areo apartenis al la Regno Kastilio. Tradiciaj enspezofontoj estis agrikulturo (cerealoj) kaj brutobredado kaj rilata komercado. Lastatempe kultura kaj rura turismo ekgravis (popola arkitekturo, historia heredo, piedirado). Vidu ankaŭ Municipoj de la provinco Avilo Notoj Municipoj de Avilo
__label__eo 19701 Aomori estas tre malgranda, treege hela asteroido de la asteroida zono malkovrita la en la kadro de la programo Lowell Observatory Near-Earth-Object Search (LONEOS) elde la Stacio Anderson Mesa de la Observatorio Lowell, sud-oriente de Flagstaff (Arizono, Usono). Ĝi ŝuldas sian nomo al la gubernio Aomori en la regiono Tohoku, plej norde de la insulo Honŝu (Japanio). La sudorienta marbordo de tiu-ĉi gubernio estis grave difektita pro la tertremo de Sendajo en 2011. Eksteraj ligiloj Asteroidoj de la ĉefa zono Malkovrita de LONEOS Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 1999
__label__eo La mezoptikiacoj () estas planta familio el briofitoj. Tiu familio apartenas al la ordo jungermanialoj (Jungermanniales). Ĝi enhavas ununuran genron (mezoptikio) kaj ununuran specion. Taksonomio Laŭ National Center for Biotechnology Information (12 apr. 2020), The Plant List kaj World Flora Online (12 apr. 2020), jen ĉi-sube la listo de la akceptitaj taksonoj, kaj ties Esperantaj nomoj: Bryophytae - briofitoj Marchantiophyta - marĉantiofitoj, hepatmuskoj Jungermanniopsida - jungermaniopsidoj Jungermanniidae - jungermaniedoj Jungermanniales Hedw. - jungermanialoj Mesoptychiaceae Inoue & Steere - mezoptikiacoj Mesoptychia (Lindb.) A. Evans - mezoptikio Referencoj Briofitoj Hepatmuskoj Plantofamilioj
__label__eo 5300 Sats estas asteroido de la asteroida zono, malkovrita la 29-an de septembro 1974 de la rusa astronomino Ljudmila Ivanovna Ĉerniĥ elde la (tiam sovetunia) Krimea astrofizika observatorio de Nauĉno, nun en Respubliko Krimeo, (Rusio). Nomo Ĝi estis nomita en memoro de la rusa dramistino kaj surscenigistino Natalija Iliniĉna Sac (cirile: Наталия Ильинична Сац, 1903–1993). Eksteraj ligiloj Asteroidoj de la ĉefa zono Malkovrita de Ljudmila Ivanovna Ĉerniĥ Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 1974
__label__eo Třesov (antaŭe ankaŭ Střesov, , Tresow) estas municipo en distrikto Třebíč en Regiono Vysočina, Ĉeĥio 20 km oriente de Třebíč. Vivas ĉi tie (). Historio La unua skribmencio pri la vilaĝo devenas el la jaro 1464. Loĝantaro Memorindaĵoj Kapelo de sankta Johano Nepomuka Vidu ankaŭ Listo de municipoj en Ĉeĥio kun la plej malalta nombro de loĝantoj Pluaj fotoj Municipoj en distrikto Třebíč Vilaĝoj en distrikto Třebíč Setlejoj en Jeviŝovica montetaro
__label__eo 65692 Trifu estas malgranda, malhela asteroido de la ĉefa asteroida zono malkovrita la de la germanaj astronomoj Lutz D. Schmadel kaj Freimut Börngen elde la Observatorio Karl Schwarzschild en Tautenburg (Germanio). Nomo Ĝia nomo honoras la ruman-devenan terfizikiston Cezar I. Trifu, kiu studis la fizikon de la tertremaj fontoj kaj enkondukis la tertremosciencon kiel altranga sciencisto kaj adjunkta profesoro ĉe la Reĝina Universitato, Kanado. Li estas aŭtoro de multenombraj artikoloj kaj libroj kaj estas ankaŭ monde konata radiofonisto en mallongondo. La nomo estis proponita de la unua malkovrinto. Eksteraj ligiloj Asteroidoj de la ĉefa zono Malkovrita de Lutz D. Schmadel Malkovrita de Freimut Börngen Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 1990
__label__eo Skórcz estas urbo en Pomerio (provinco de Pollando) en Pollando. Ĝi apartenas al komunumo Skórcz en distrikto Starogardzki. Esperanto En la jaro 2007 en la urbo estis kun vizito mondfama fizikisto-esperantisto Amri Wandel el la Hebrea Universitato de Jerusalemo / Israelo - filo de Leo Sommerfeld kiu naskiĝis en Skórcz kaj feliĉe Leo komence de Dua Mondmilito fuĝis tra Sovet-Unio kaj Irano al Palestino kie en 1954 naskiĝis lia filo Amri. Dum la vizito en Pollando li unue estis en esperantista "PARKO de la MONDO" en Malbork / Pollando kaj tie li inaŭguris ZEOn "Israelo" kaj plantis cedron omaĝe al sia patro Leo Sommerfeld kiu naskiĝis en apuda urbeto Skórcz, la ceremonion ĉeestis i.a. la urbestroj de Malborko kaj Skórcz (;,). Urboj de Pomerio (provinco de Pollando) Urboj en Pollando
__label__eo Leș [leŝ] ( [va:radleŝ]) estas vilaĝo en Rumanio sudoriente de Oradea. Administre ĝi apartenas al Nojorid. Loĝantaro En 1910 ĝi nombris 891 loĝantojn (rumanoj, hungaroj, ciganoj), en 1992 1 835 (rumanoj, 6,8 % da hungaroj). Laŭ la censo de 2002 estis: Historio Ĝi estis unue menciita skribe en 1291. Ĝis 1919 kaj inter 1940 kaj 1944 ĝi apartenis al Hungario (Bihar). Fonto Magyar Életrajzi Lexikon Gravaj personoj Lipót Molnos, Müller; Molnosy Müller literaturhistoriisto: (Váradles, 16-a de junio 1897 – Budapest, 16-a de oktobro 1982). Eksteraj ligiloj Popolnombrado 2002 Vilaĝoj de Rumanio Distrikto Bihor
__label__eo Ummanz estas komunumo en Germanio. Ĝi troviĝas en la distrikto Antaŭpomerio-Rügen de la federacia lando Meklenburgo-Antaŭpomerio. La norda duono de la komunuma teritorio kovras la samnoman insuleton Ummanz, dum la suda duono estas parto de la multe pli granda insulo Rügen. Administre ĝi apartenas la la komunumaro Amt West-Rügen de pluraj proksime kunlaborantaj najbaraj komunumoj. Fine de la komunumo havis loĝantojn. Eksteraj ligiloj oficiala retejo de la komunumaro () Insuloj en Meklenburgo-Antaŭpomerio Distrikto Antaŭpomerio-Rügen Urboj de Meklenburgo-Antaŭpomerio
__label__eo Dienville estas franca varstacidomo sur linio - Sorcy, situanta en Dienville, en departemento , regiono Grand Est. Temas pri stacidomo de Société nationale des chemins de fer français (SNCF). Ĝi situas ĉe kilometra punkto (PK) de linio Jessains - Sorcy (015000). Vidu ankaŭ Dienville Stacidomoj de Francio Fret SNCF Fervojaj stacioj en Aube Dienville
__label__eo The Lancet estas ĉiusemajna reviziita ĝenerale gazeto pri medicino. Ĝi estas unu el la plej antikvaj el mondo kaj unu el la plej bone konataj medicinaj gazetoj. The Lancet estis fondita en 1823 de Thomas Wakley, angla kirurgo kiu nomigis ĝin laŭ la kirurgia instrumento nome angle lancet (skalpelo), same kiel laŭ la anglalingva termino de gotika arkitekturo "lancet arch" (ogiva fenestro), nome fenestro kun akrapinta arko, kiu indikas la "lumon de saĝo" aŭ "lumigi". The Lancet publikigas originalajn esplorajn artikolojn, revuajn artikolojn ("seminarioj" kaj "revuoj"), redaktajn angulojn, librorezencojn, korespondadon, same kiel novaĵojn kaj informojn. The Lancet estis posedo de Elsevier ekde 1991. Je 2015, la ĉefradaktoro estas Richard Horton. La gazeto havas eldonejajn oficejojn en Londono, Novjorko, kaj Pekino. Referencoj Eksteraj ligiloj The Lancet Student Anglalingvaj gazetoj Sciencaj gazetoj Ĉiusemajnaj gazetoj Medicinaj gazetoj Ĝenerala medicino Aperis en 1823
__label__eo Essen estas vilaĝeto en la komunumo Haren en la provinco Groningen, situante tuj ĉe la rando de la urbo Groningen. Ĝi situas en la verda bufro inter la urbo Groningen kaj la vilaĝo Haren. En 1215 ĉi tie oni fondis monaĥinejon kiu apartenis al la ordeno de la Cistercianoj. Tiu monaĥejo Yesse (pliposte ankaŭ nomata monaĥejo Essen) ekzistis ĝis 1594. dum la reformacio ĝi transiris al la provinco Groningen kiu fermis la monaĥejon. La monaĥejo estis iom konata ĉar ĝi havus mirakldonan statuon de Maria. Hodiaŭ ne plu estas postsigno de la monaĥejo. La hodiaŭa Essen konsistas el proksimume 20 biendomoj kiuj situas je rondiranta strato. Piedirante tra tiu strato oni povas malfacile imagi ke la Granda Placo de Groningen situas je distanco de nur 5 km. Vilaĝoj de Nederlando Loĝlokoj en Groningo
__label__eo 78432 Helensailer estas malgranda malhela asteroido de la ekstera asteroida zono, nemalproksima de la orbita resonanco 2:1 kun Jupitero. Malkovro Ĝi estis malkovrita la de la usona amatora astronomo Robert D. Matson sur fotografioj faritaj en la kadro de la kampanjo NEAT elde la Observatorio de la Monto Palomar (Kalifornio, Usono). Nomo Ĝi estis nomita en memoro de Helen Rachel Sailer (1918 — 2019), kiu lernis la aviadon en 1939, ricevis sian rajtigilon kiel privata pilotino en 1945 post esti laborinta en la milita industrio kaj fine ricevis komercan rajtigilon por plurmotora aviadilo. Praonklino de la malkovrinto, ŝi markis sian 50-an naskodaton kiel dumviva membrino de la virina aviada organizo Ninety-Nines. Notoj kaj referencoj Eksteraj ligiloj Asteroidoj de la ĉefa zono Malkovrita de Robert D. Matson Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 2002
__label__eo 55331 Putzi estas malgranda, malhela asteroido de la ĉefa asteroida zono malkovrita la de la usona amatora astronomo Charles W. Juels, kaj de la brazila amatora astronomo Paulo R. Holvorcem, elde la Observatorio de Fountain Hills (Arizono, Usono). Nomo Ĝia nomo honoras Antonie (Putzi) T. Schwartz, patrinon, artistinon kaj praktikantinon de alternativa medicino. Ŝi entuziasme subtenis la astronomiajn klopodojn de sia edzo Terry Schwartz ĉe la Observatorioj Tenagra en Cottage Grove (Oregono) kaj Patagonia (Arizono) ekde 1995. Eksteraj ligiloj Asteroidoj de la ĉefa zono Malkovrita de Charles W. Juels Malkovrita de Paulo R. Holvorcem Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 2001
__label__eo Los Santos estas municipo de la provinco Salamanko, en la aŭtonoma komunumo Kastilio-Leono, Hispanio. Ĝi apartenas al la Jurisdikcia partio de Béjar kaj al la municiparoj Embalse de Béjar kaj Ruta de la Plata. Los Santos estas tradukebla al La Sanktuloj. Ĝia municipa teritorio estas formata de unusola loĝloko, okupas totalan areon de 44,32 km² kaj laŭ la demografia informo de la municipa censo fare de la INE en 2017, ĝi havis 633 loĝantojn. Ĝi perdis pli ol mil loĝantojn dum la dua duono de la 20-a jarcento. Tradicie estis grava la elfosado kaj manipulado de granito, poste de volframo. Nuntempe gravas la industrio de porkaĵoj (ŝinkoj kaj kolbasoj) rilate al la najbara Guijuelo kaj la rura turismo. Municipoj de la provinco Salamanko
__label__eo Vallcarca estas stacio sur linio 3 de la Metroo de Barcelono, situanta en Barcelono. Vidu ankaŭ Stacioj de la metroo de Barcelono Stacioj de la metroo de Barcelono Linio 3 de la metroo de Barcelono Metrostacioj malfermitaj en 1985 1985 en Hispanio
__label__eo La historia Graflando Limburg ampleksis teritorion de proksimume 118 kvadrataj kilometroj inter la malsupra Lenne kaj la Ruhr. Ĝi estis kreita kiel partaĵo de Limburg-Isenberg en 1246, kaj estis aligita al Limburg-Styrum en 1304. Limburg-Hohenlimburg pasis al Daun-Falkenstein en 1511 Grafoj Eberhardo la 1-a de Limburg-Styrum Eksteraj ligiloj – Historia ligaro kun informoj Dokumentoj pri la graflando Limburg Mapoj de la graflando kun historia priskribo Teritorioj de la Sankta Romia Imperio Germanaj graflandoj Historiaj teritorioj Hagen
__label__eo 1996 Adams estas asteroido de la asteroida zono, malkovrita la en la kadro de la Indianaa Programo pri la Asteroidoj elde la Observatorio Goethe Link, apud Broklino en Indianao (Usono). Nomo Ĝia nomo honoras la britan astronomon kaj matematikiston John Couch Adams. Eksteraj ligiloj Asteroidoj de la ĉefa zono Malkovrita de Indiana Asteroid Program Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 1961
__label__eo La Tago de Silento (, DoS) estas ĉiujara internacia aranĝo en kiu partoprenas lerneja, universitata junularo kaj instruistoj kontraŭantaj gejfobion. Partoprenantoj de aktivismo promesas silenti tutan tagon. Tio ĉi silento simbolas silenton kun kiu, laŭ la protestantoj, devas vivi ĉiutatege lesbaninoj, gejoj, ambaŭseksemuloj kaj transgenruloj. Junuloj donas al aliaj homoj folietojn kun teksto: Historio La unua Tago de Silento aranĝiĝis en la Universitato de Viriginio (Usono), en 1996. Partoprenis ĝin 150 studentoj. En la sekva jaro partoprenis jam 100 universitatoj en Usono. Ekde 2000 oficiala impresario estas organizo GLSEN. Laŭ ĝiaj taksoj, en 2006 partoprenis Tagon de Silento pli ol 450 mil studentoj kaj lernantoj en pli ol lernejoj kaj universitatoj. GLSEN opinias, ke Tago de Silento estas la plej granda studenta aranĝo pri GLAT en Usono. Nune en la projekto partoprenas ankaŭ junuloj el aliaj ŝtatoj, ekzemple: Nederlando, Pollando, Slovenio, Svedio, Rusio. Vidu ankaŭ GLAT Internacia tago kontraŭ homofobio, transfobio kaj bifobio kontraŭgeja diskriminacio Ekteraj ligiloj Tago de Silento (en) Tago de Silento en Pollando (pl) GLAT-eventoj
__label__eo Eksperimenta teatro estas ĝenerala termino por diversaj movadoj en la historio de okcidenta teatro, kiu en la 20-a jarcento oponis kontraŭ al la tiam regantaj konvencioj pri verkado kaj produktado de scenejaj dramoj. Ĝi ankaŭ starigis sin kontraŭ la teatra skolo de Naturismo. La termino 'Eksperimenta Teatro' estas uzata pli-malpli interŝanĝeble kun la titolo Avangarda teatro. Unu aparta, tempe limigita fazo de eksperimenta teatro en la 20-a jarcento estas karakterizita kiel "Absurda Teatro" ("Teatro de la Absurdoj"), sed nur kelkaj dramistoj estas konsiderataj tiel esti nomataj: aparte menciindas Samuel Beckett, Václav Havel, Eugène Ionesco, Alfred Jarry, Sławomir Mrożek, Harold Pinter, Tadeusz Różewicz kaj Jean Tardieu. Vidu ankaŭ Stratoteatro Literaturo Hildegard Seipel: Untersuchungen zum experimentellen Theater von Beckett und Ionesco (germane: "Esploroj pri la Eksperimenta Teatro de Beckett kaj Ionesco", Bonn 1962. Teatro
__label__eo 13441 Janmerlin estas asteroido de la asteroida zono, malkovrita la de la usona astronomo Tom Gehrels, de la Observatorio de la Monto Palomar (Kantono San-Diego, Kalifornio, Usono) kaj de la nederlandaj geedzoj geastronomoj Ingrid van Houten-Groeneveld kaj Cornelis Johannes van Houten, de la Observatorio de Leiden (Nederlando) en la kadro de la Palomar–Leiden survey. Tom Gehrels estis eksponita 130 en septembro kaj oktobro 1960 per la Schmidt-teleskopo de 122 cm de la Monto Palomar. Tiuj platoj, poste senditaj en Leiden (Nederlando) estis ekzamenitaj de la geedzoj Ingrid kaj Cornelis van Houten dum la sekvantaj jaroj. Nomo Ĝia nomo honoras la usonan aktoron Jan Merlin kiu rolis kiel la kadeto Roger Manning en la sciencfikcia televida serio Tom Corbett, Space Cadet (1950). Li estis kosmonavigatoro sur la radara ferdeko de la raketa kosmoŝipo kaj senĉese gvatis asteroidojn kaj kometojn. Eksteraj ligiloj Asteroidoj de la ĉefa zono Malkovrita de Cornelis Johannes van Houten Malkovrita de Tom Gehrels Malkovrita de Ingrid van Houten-Groeneveld Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 1960
__label__eo Barra do Piraí estas municipo de la brazila subŝtato Rio-de-Ĵanejrio, kiu taksis 94.855 loĝantojn en 2010 . Referencoj Vidu ankaŭ Municipoj de Rio-de-Ĵanejrio Eksteraj ligiloj Oficiala paĝo Asocio de Municipoj de Rio-de-Ĵanejrio Municipoj de Rio-de-Ĵanejrio
__label__eo La Preĝejo Kunkatedralo Sankta Maria la Plejgranda de Merido, kiu havas la metropolitan rangon, staras en la centro de la historia urboparto de la ekstremadura ĉefurbo ĉe angulo de la centra placo Plaza de España. Kune al la Katedralo de Badaĥozo, ĝi estas la sidejo de la ĉefepiskopo de la ĉefdiocezo de Merido-Badaĥozo. Heredanto de la antikva visigota Preĝejo Sankta Jerusalemo de Merido, ĝia nuna aspekto komenciĝas ekde la konkero de la urbo fare de la reĝo Alfonso la 9-a, kies restaĵoj plej antikvaj venas de la 13-a jarcento. Kvankam laŭ la eklezio organizo estas la plej grava preĝejo de la regiona ĉefurbo Merido, fakte la meridanoj plie adoras la koncernan sanktulinon Sankta Eŭlalia ĉe ties propra preĝejo en alia neproksima norda parto de la urbo. Eksteraj ligiloj Retpaĝo de la Kunkatedralo de Merido Kunkatedraloj en Hispanio Ekstremaduro Religiaj konstruaĵoj finitaj en 1570-1579 Aperis en 1579
__label__eo Opiejo estas instalaĵo kie oni vendas kaj fumas opion. Opiejoj ekzistis en multaj partoj de la mondo en la 19a jarcento, ĉefe en Ĉinio, Sudorienta Azio, Nordameriko kaj Francio. En Okcidento, opiejoj estis vizititaj de kaj asociitaj kun ĉinoj, ĉar tiuj instalaĵoj estis kutime regataj de ĉinoj kiuj havigis la opion same kiel preparis ĝin por vizitantaj neĉinaj fumantoj. Plej opiejoj havis opiilojn kiel la specializitajn pipojn kaj lampojn kiuj estis necesaj por fumi la drogon. Klientoj kutime kuŝis por teni la longajn opipipojn super olelampoj kiuj varmigis la drogon ĝis ĝi vaporiĝis, permesante al fumanto inhali vaporojn. Opiejoj en Ĉinio estis vizitataj de ĉiuj niveloj de la socio, kaj ilia riĉo aŭ simpleco montris la financajn rimedojn de la klientoj. En urbaj areoj de Usono, partikulare en la Okcidenta Marbordo, estis opiejoj kiuj intencis respeguli la plej bonajn el Ĉinio, kun luksa ornamado kaj inaj helpantinoj. Por la laborista klaso, estis multaj malbonkvalitaj opiejoj kun pli disaj disponebloj. Tiuj plej facile akceptis ne-ĉinajn fumantojn. Notoj Opia kulturo
__label__eo Rožná () estas municipo de Ĉeĥio troviĝanta en distrikto Žďár nad Sázavou en Regiono Vysočina. Vivas ĉi tie (). Historio La unua skribmencio pri la vilaĝo devenas el la jaro 1349. Loĝantaro Partoj de municipo Rožná Josefov Zlatkov Memorindaĵoj Preĝejo de sankta Gallus kun tombejo Paroĥestrejo Burgo Rožná Pluaj fotoj Municipoj en distrikto Žďár nad Sázavou Vilaĝoj en distrikto Žďár nad Sázavou Setlejoj en Suprasvratka montetaro Setlejoj en Křižanova montetaro
__label__eo Vasco da Gama (ofte mallongigata al Vasco) estas urbo en Goao de Barato. Ĝi estas nomata pro la portugala esploristo Vasco da Gama. Vasco estas la plej granda urbo de Goa, kun taksata loĝantaro de pli ol 100.000. Ĝi ankaŭ estas la ĉefa porto de Goa kaj la ĉefloko de la loka registraro. La urbo situas la punkto de la duoninsulo Mormugao ĉe la riverbuŝo de la rivero Zuari. Ĝi estas proksime 30 km fore de Panaji, la ĉefurbo de Goao. La urbo fondiĝas en 1543, kaj restis sub portugala regno ĝis 1961, kiam Goa estis aneksigita al Barato. Urboj de Barato Setlejoj nomitaj laŭ personoj
__label__eo La Zimbabva Esperanto-Instituto (AEK) estas la landa Esperanto-asocio en la afrika ŝtato Zimbabvo. Formale estante instituto, ĝi havas neformalajn rilatojn al Universala Esperanto-Asocio, sed ne estas formala landa asocio. La instituto havas sian sidejon en la urbo Bindura. Kunordiganto de la instituto laŭ la stato de aprilo 2010 estis Oliver Mazodze ĝis lia morto la 15-an de majo 2010. Eksteraj ligiloj bazaj informoj pri la asocio en la retejo de UEA Zimbabvaj Esperanto-asocioj Esperanto-Institutoj
__label__eo estas kroata futbalisto. Li naskiĝis en Split kaj, post sep anktaŭaj orofesiaj jaroj, ekde 2022 apartenas al la unua teamo de la klubo Eintracht Frankfurt. Ekde la jaro 2021 li estas membro de la kroata nacia teamo de futbalo. Kadre de ĝi, li interalie kunkonkuris pri la Futbala Mondpokalo 2022 en Kataro, matĉe li tie rekoneblis per la numero "26" - same en la Futbala Mondpokalo 2022 en Kataro. En la Futbala Mondpokalo 2022 la teamo kun li atingis la trian, "bronzan", pozicion, post eĉ dua pozicio (ankoraŭ sen li) en la antaŭa mondpokala turniro de 2018 - respektindaj rezultoj. Kroataj futbalistoj Naskiĝintoj en Kroatio
__label__eo {{DISPLAYTITLE: (19604) 1999 NY48}} (19604) 1999 NY48 estas asteroido de la asteroida zono malkovrita la en la kadro de la kampanjo "LINEAR" (Lincoln Near-Earth Asteroid Research) elde la situejo de Socorro de la Laboratorio Lincoln (Nov-Meksiko, Usono). Eksteraj ligiloj Asteroidoj de la ĉefa zono Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 1999 Malkovrita de LINEAR
__label__eo Historio > Milito > Religia milito > Sankta milito < Religio Religia milito aŭ sankta milito (Latine: bellum sacrum) estas milito ĉefe kaŭzata aŭ justigita pere de diferencoj en religioj de la diversaj flankoj. Eŭropaj militoj de religio Ĝihado estas milito de islamanoj por sia religio Krucmilito estas milito de kristanoj pro sia religio. Vidu ankaŭ Nordaj Krucmilitoj Reconquista Religio Militoj
__label__eo Preĝejo de Naskiĝo de Maria estas Monumento historia en Hungario, en urbo Jászapáti. Historio La unua mencio pri la gotika preĝejo okazis en 1391. Laŭ alia informo la turo konstruiĝis en 1493. Dum dominado de turkoj la preĝejo ne detruiĝis, nur iomete ruiniĝis. Inter 1745-1759 ĝi barokiĝis kaj pligrandiĝis, en la 1820-aj jaroj iomete ĝi klasikismiĝis. La lasta trakonstruo okazis en 1833. Konstruaĵo La preĝejo estas ĉirkaŭita per defenda muro kaj havas 2 turojn. La navo formas krucon. Super la enirejo estas videbla skulptaĵo pri Sankta Anna. La ĉefaltaro prezentas naskiĝon de Sankta Maria. Estas ankaŭ 2 flankaj altaroj. La freskoj pretiĝis en 1904 fare de Pál Vágó (pentristo). Fontoj Hungara Vikipedio hungare hungare Jaszapati Jaszapati
__label__eo Monterosso Calabro estas komunumo de Italio. Ĝi apartenas al la regiono Kalabrio kaj la provinco Vibo Valentia kaj situas en alteco de metroj super la marnivelo. Fine de en la komunumo vivis sur areo de kvadrataj kilometroj, kio rezultigas loĝdenson de loĝantoj/km². Kristana patrono estas la , kies memortago sekve estas la komunuma festotago. Najbaras la komunumoj . Eksteraj ligiloj () informoj en administra datumbazo, kun informoj pri lernejoj, apotekoj kaj bankoj () Komunumoj de Italio Komunumoj de Kalabrio Komunumoj de Provinco Vibo Valentia
__label__eo Rubén Darío estas stacio sur de la Metroo de Madrido, situanta sub Promenejo de Eduardo Dato, inter la Rondaĵo de Rubén Darío kaj la Promenejo de la Castellana. La stacio estis malfermita la . Vidu ankaŭ Linio 5 (metroo de Madrido) Stacioj de la metroo de Madrido Eksteraj ligiloj Stacioj de la metroo de Madrido Linio 5 de la metroo de Madrido Metrostacioj malfermitaj en 1970 1970 en Hispanio
__label__eo Singapura Esperanto-Asocio LLP estas la nacia asocio por subteno de la Esperanto-movado en la azia urboŝtato Singapuro. Ĝi estas Landa Asocio de Esperanto ne aliĝinta al UEA. Alia grava kunlaboranto estas Azia Komisiono de UEA. La 3 fondistoj estas Wilson, Zend kaj Frank. Retpoŝte : pere de Eksteraj ligiloj suben. Eksteraj ligiloj Informeto lige al Singapura Esperanto-Asocio en la retejo de UEA Blogo nomiĝas Singapuraj Esperantistoj Singapura Esperanto-Asocio en reto de landaj asocioj de Esperanto. esperantosingapore@gmail.com Vidu ankaŭ Azia Komisiono de UEA Singapura turismo : Gardens by the Bay Aziaj Esperanto-asocioj
__label__eo La Premio de la jara lingvofraŭdanto () estas disdonata de la Verein Deutsche Sprache e.V. por ulo de la elito kiu disvolvas la anglan lingvon en Germanio. La premio estis kreita en 1997. Listo de gajnintoj 2015 : Wolfgang A. Herrmann (Teknologia Universitato Munkeno) 2014 : Ursula von der Leyen 2013 : Duden 2012 : Andrew Jennings 2011 : René Obermann 2010 : Fritz Pleitgen 2009 : Deutscher Turner-Bund 2008 : Klaus Wowereit 2007 : Hartmut Mehdorn 2006 : Günther Oettinger 2005 : Herbert Beck 2004 : Markus Schächter. 2003 : Gerhard Mayer-Vorfelder 2002 : Klaus Zumwinkel 2001 : Wolfgang H. Zocher 2000 : Andreas Heldrich 1999 : Andreas Heldrich 1998 : Ron Sommer 1997 : Jil Sander Notoj kaj referencoj Vidu ankaŭ Vidu ankaŭ Premio de la angla mato Eksteraj ligiloj Verein Deutsche Sprache e.V. Germana lingvo Angla lingvo Premioj Ironiaj kaj humuraj premioj
__label__eo La cerefolio (anthriscus cerefolium) botanike apartenas al la apiacoj (apiaceae). En la kuirarto uzatas la folioj de la planto. Cerefolio fajnigas ĉefe salatojn, saŭcojn (interalie la Frankfurtan verdan saŭcon), supojn, ovaĵojn, kokaĵojn kaj fiŝaĵojn. Spicoj Apiacoj
__label__eo Szentkatalin [sentkatalin] estas malgranda vilaĝo en Hungario, en regiono Suda Transdanubio, en departemento Baranya, en Distrikto Szentlőrinc. La loknomo signifas hungare: Sankta Katerino. Bazaj informoj Areo: 13 km² Loĝantaro: 150 Poŝtkodo: 7681 Telefonprefikso: 73 Koordinatoj: 46°10′17″N 18°03'08″E Situo Szentkatalin situas en valo de rojo, fine de sakovojo. Szentlőrinc troviĝas 20, Sásd 21, Pécs 26, Komló 32, Budapeŝto 206 km-ojn. Historio La loko estis loĝata jam dum la bronzepoko. Antaŭ la hungaroj romianoj vivis tie. Szentkatalin menciiĝis unuafoje en 1542 laŭ tiama hungara ortografio "Zenth Chaterina". La vilaĝo ne senhomiĝis dum regado de la turkoj. En 1750 germanoj alvenis. En 1978 la najbara vilaĝeto Karácodfa aliĝis al Szentkatalin. En Szentkatalin migra poŝto servas. Vidindaĵoj sonorilostablo Komunumoj de Sankta Katerino en Hungara reĝlando Vilaĝoj de Hungario Vilaĝoj en departemento Baranya
__label__eo Dorndorf havas diversajn signifojn: Dorndorf (Werra) estas komunumo en distrikto Wartburg de Turingio en Germanio. Dorndorf estas la germana nomo de Dumești en distrikto Hunedoara. Dorndorf estas la germana nomo de Draĉino la Transkarpata provinco en Ukrainio. Krome temas pri parto de la ĝis 2007 ekzistinta komunumo Dorndorf-Steudnitz, ekde 2008 parto de la urbo Dornburg-Camburg, en la distrikto Saale-Holzland de la federacia lando Turingio en Germanio.
__label__eo (jen france, okcitane Olieras) estas komunumo de Francio. Ĝi situas en la departemento Var, en la regiono Provenco-Alpoj-Bordo Lazura (, prononcata , okcitane Provença-Aups-Còsta d'Azur). Fine de en la komunumo vivis . Eksteraj ligiloj (, jen aŭtomate tradukita) bazaj turismaj informoj ( kaj ) Vidu ankaŭ komunumoj de Var Komunumoj de Var
__label__eo La silmariloj (en la fikcia elfa kvenja lingvo plurale Silmarilli, "brilo de pura lumo") estas tri fikciaj brilaj juveloj kunmetitaj de la senmanka aŭ senmakula lumo de la Du Arboj en la legendaro de J.R.R. Tolkien pri la fikcia lando Mez-Tero. La Silmariloj estis farita el la kristala substanco silima fare de Fëanor, elfo de Noldor, en Valinor dum la Jaroj de la Arboj. La silmariloj ludas centran rolon en la libro Silmariliono de Tolkien, kiu rakontas pri la kreado de Eä (la universo) kaj la komenco de elfoj, nanoj kaj homoj. Objektoj de Mez-Tero
__label__eo {{DISPLAYTITLE: (83916) 2001 VS8}} (83916) 2001 VS8 estas malgranda, malhela asteroido de la ekstera asteroida zono, ano de la Hilda grupo, tie estas en orbita resonanco 2:3 kun Jupitero. Malkovro Ĝi estis malkovrita la en la kadro de la astronomia kampanjo LINEAR (Lincoln Near-Earth Asteroid Research) elde la observatorio de la Laboratorio Lincoln en Socorro (Nov-Meksiko, Usono). Eksteraj ligiloj Hilda grupo Malkovrita de LINEAR Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 2001
__label__eo Gergely Devich [gergej deviĥ], laŭ hungarlingve kutima nomordo Devich Gergely estas hungara violonĉelisto. Lia avo estis János Devich. Gergely Devich naskiĝis la en Budapeŝto. Biografio Gergely Devich konatiĝis kun la violonĉelo en muziklernejo en sia naskiĝurbo en aĝo de 8. En 2008 li atingis la unuan lokon en muzika konkurso, en la sekva jaro la orkestro (kun li) estis la unua. Ekde 2012 li studis en talenta klaso de Muzikarta Universitato Ferenc Liszt. Lia majstro estis László Mező. Li ricevis premiojn ekde la 2010-aj jaroj. Elektitaj koncertoj Palaco de Artoj (2012) Fontoj hungarlingva biografio kun foto hungarlingva biografio kun foto hungarlingva biografio kun foto Referencoj Hungaraj violonĉelistoj Budapeŝtanoj
__label__eo Iván Raisz [rajs], laŭ hungarlingve kutima nomordo Raisz Iván estis hungara matematikisto, profesoro. Iván Raisz naskiĝis la en Diósgyőr. Li mortis la en Miskolc. Biografio Iván Raisz akiris pedagogian diplomon en Scienca Universitato Péter Pázmány en 1935. En la sekva jaro li akiris plian diplomon en Scienca Universitato Ferenc József. Inter 1935 kaj 1949 li instruis en luterana lernejo por instruistoj, sed interrompo okazis en 1944 pro la soldatiĝo. En la studjaro 1949 li instruis en gimnazio en Miskolc, poste en Pezindustria Universitato Mátyás Rákosi. Li estis docento inter 1952-1977, poste li pensiuliĝis. Li ricevis memormedalon en 1961. Li okupiĝis pri trigonometrio. Elektitaj kontribuoj Gépész-és Villamosmérnökök Kézikönyve I-II. (1959-1961) - kunlaboranto Alkalmazott matematika olajmérnökök részére (1962) Műszaki Matematika I-IV. (1968-1969) - kunlaboranto Fontoj hungarlingva biografio kun foto Hungaraj matematikistoj Hungaraj profesoroj
__label__eo ASK IR - (mallongigo de Amplitude Shifted Keyer IR) varianto de normo IrDA 1.1 proektita far Sharp. La interfaco uzas por la transdono elektromagnetajn ondojn de infraruĝa parto de lumo. Radiilo por Ir-konekto estas lumdiodo, havanta pinton de povumo ĉe 880 nm. La lumdiodo produktas konusforman radiadon kun angulo ĉirkaŭ 30°. Por ricevilo estas uzatata PIN-diodo, efektive akceptata Ir-radiojn en konuso 15°. Bona kunligo estas inter du aparatoj distanco inter kiuj ne estas pli ol kelkaj metroj. ASK IR estas malsinkrona interfaco kaj havas rapidecon 9,6-57,6 Kb dum sek. por konekto al komputoro estas uzataj interfacoj RS-234C kaj USB. Mallongigoj
__label__eo - prononco laŭ sistemo IFA [] - estas komunumo de Francio. Ĝi situas en la departemento Ardennes (prononco []), en la regiono Grand Est (prononco [] , (france, en Esperanto Granda Oriento) kaj en la antaŭa regiono Ĉampanjo-Ardenoj. Fine de en la komunumo vivis sur areo de kvadrataj kilometroj, kio rezultigas loĝdenson de loĝantoj/km². Administre la komunumo apartenas al la arondismento Sedan (prononco [], ) kaj al la kantono . Vidu ankaŭ Komunumoj de Ardennes Komunumoj de Ardennes
__label__eo Ivaniĉi () estas fervoja stacio en (Volina provinco), urbotipa loĝloko en Ukrainio. Vidu ankaŭ Listo de fervojaj stacioj en Ukrainio Transporto en Ukrainio Eksteraj ligiloj Ivaniĉi en retejo tochka-na-karte Ivaniĉi (Volina provinco) Fervojaj stacioj malfermitaj en 1914 Fervojaj stacioj en Volina provinco 1914 en Ukrainio
__label__eo {{DISPLAYTITLE: (15585) 2000 GR74}} (15585) 2000 GR74 estas asteroido de la asteroida zono, malkovrita la dum la kampanjo "LINEAR" (Lincoln Near-Earth Asteroid Research) elde la situejo de Socorro de la Laboratorio Lincoln (Nov-Meksiko, Usono). Eksteraj ligiloj Asteroidoj de la ĉefa zono Malkovrita de LINEAR Astronomiaj objektoj malkovritaj en 2000
__label__eo La kantono Hartley situas en la subŝtato Teksaso de Usono. Laŭ censa takso de ĝi havis loĝantojn. Ĝia ĉefloko kaj administra centro nomiĝas Channing. Vidu ankaŭ la liston de kantonoj de Teksaso. Eksteraj ligiloj () Kantonoj de Teksaso
__label__eo Ichikawa Raizō VIII(八代目 市川 雷蔵, Hachidaime Ichikawa Raizō) mallongigite Ichikawa Raizō (naskiĝinta la 29-a de aŭgusto, 1931, mortinta la 17-an de julio, 1969) estis japana aktoro de Kabuko kaj Filmo. Li estis unu el plej famaj aktoroj en 1950-aj jaroj kaj 1960-aj jaroj en Japanio. Li ludis la rolon de Johano Arima en La Sturmo de Johano Arima. Japanaj aktoroj
__label__eo Bobbau estas komunumo en Germanio. Ĝi troviĝas en la distrikto Bitterfeld de la federacia lando Saksio-Anhalto. La 31-an de decembro 2003 la komunumo havis 1713 loĝantojn. Distrikto Bitterfeld Urboj de Saksio-Anhalto
__label__eo Kiu estas via sangogrupo?
__label__eo Mi scivolis, kial homoj fikse rigardis min.
__label__eo Prenu libron kaj legu ĝin!
__label__eo Dankon, tio estas ĉio.
__label__eo Venu rapide!
__label__eo Ĉu vi volas danci kun mi?
__label__eo Ne forgesu nin!
__label__eo Mi ne scias.
__label__eo Li saltis el la fenestro.
__label__eo Li diris al mi, ke li iros al Venecio.
__label__eo Kiom kostas tio?
__label__eo Ĉi tiu libro ne estas tiel facila kiel tiu.
__label__eo La filmo komenciĝis je la 2a.
__label__eo Ĉu vi povus retelefoni pli malfrue?
__label__eo Ne rigardu malantaŭen.
__label__eo Ĉu vi entute aŭskultas min?
__label__eo Kutime mi lavas la telerojn.
__label__eo La fajro ekbrulis.
__label__eo Mi ne parolas la japanan.
__label__eo Mi amas vin!
__label__eo Mi ĝojas revidi vin.
__label__eo Ho! Montru ĝin al mi bonvole.
__label__eo Feliĉan naskiĝtagon, Muiriel!
__label__eo Mi ankoraŭ ne skribas bone la ĉinan.
__label__eo Ĉi tiu pomo estas tre ruĝa.
__label__eo Mi ŝatus rezervi ĉambron en hotelo.
__label__eo Ĉu vi memoras min?
__label__eo Kion mi kunportu?
__label__eo Kial vi demandas?
__label__eo Laboremo igis Jack tio, kio li estas.
__label__eo Kunportu viajn infanojn.
__label__eo Mi veturigos vin al la flughaveno.
__label__eo Bona demando.
__label__eo Mi revenos.
__label__eo Ne forgesu, ke ni havas hejmtaskojn.
__label__eo Mi ne havas multe da mono.
__label__eo Ŝi memoras la aŭton de sinjoro Black.
__label__eo Li parolas ankaŭ en la franca.
__label__eo Tio estas plezuro por ni.
__label__eo Kioma horo estas?
__label__eo Tio estas surprizo.
__label__eo Ni revenu.
__label__eo Bonvolu doni al mi glason da akvo.
__label__eo La vivo belas.
__label__eo Mi montros kelkajn fotojn al vi.
__label__eo Ne forgesu la bileton.
__label__eo Mi havas kapdoloron.
__label__eo La demando jenas.
__label__eo Neniu scios.
__label__eo Mi memoras la unuan fojon.
__label__eo Mi hontas pri mi mem.
__label__eo Nun mi memoras.
__label__eo Prenu taksion al la hotelo.
__label__eo Mi memoras, ke mi spektis la filmon.
__label__eo Ne. Mi pardonpetas, mi devas reveni frue.
__label__eo Bonvolu pardoni min.
__label__eo Oni ne povas esti sukcesa se oni ne multe laboras.
__label__eo Kiom for estas la flughaveno?
__label__eo Ĝi estas tiu de mia frato.
__label__eo Ni esperas, ke vi ĝuos la montraĵon.
__label__eo Portu ĝin al mi.
__label__eo Mi havas demandon.
__label__eo Mi ne malgajnos!
__label__eo Al la hotelo Hilton bonvolu.
__label__eo Ekzistas multaj hoteloj en la urbocentro.
__label__eo Malŝaltu la lumon. Mi ne povas ekdormi.
__label__eo Mankas nenio.
__label__eo Ĉiun matenon mi iras aĉetumi.
__label__eo Mi estas en la flughaveno nun.
__label__eo La kalkulon, bonvolu.
__label__eo Malvarmas.
__label__eo Mi revenis! Ho? Ĉu ni havas gaston?
__label__eo Aĥ, kiam ili renkontiĝos denove?
__label__eo Mi devas enlitiĝi.
__label__eo Bonvolu reskribi baldaŭ.
__label__eo Tio ne gravas.
__label__eo Kiel oni literumas "pretty"?
__label__eo Kie estas la enirejo en la muzeon?
__label__eo Ŝajnas, ke la trajno malfruas.
__label__eo Gepatroj amas siajn gefilojn.
__label__eo Kiam vi intencas ĉesi fumi?
__label__eo Kio mankas?
__label__eo Respondu la demandon.
__label__eo Neniu komprenas min.
__label__eo Ĉi tiu kuko estas dolĉa.
__label__eo Ĉu vi memoras?
__label__eo Tio tro multekostas!
__label__eo Kia surprizo!
__label__eo Mi ja esperas, ke vi venos denove.
__label__eo Ni ne povas dormi pro la bruo.
__label__eo Laboremo estis la ĉefa faktoro de lia nekredebla sukceso.
__label__eo Li malsukcesos en sia nova projekto, krom se li estos laborema.
__label__eo Pardonu, permesu al mi indiki tri erarojn en la supra artikolo.
__label__eo Oni ne povas esti sukcesa, se oni ne estas laborema.
__label__eo Kiom longe daŭras la vojaĝo per la flughavena buso al la flughaveno?
__label__eo Tiu gitaro estas tiom multekosta, ke mi ne povas aĉeti ĝin.
__label__eo Ĉiuj homoj estas denaske liberaj kaj egalaj laŭ digno kaj rajtoj. Ili posedas racion kaj konsciencon, kaj devus konduti unu al alia en spirito de frateco.
__label__ia Le Unified Modeling Language (UML, Linguage de Modello Unificate) es un linguage de modellisation de intention general in le campo del ingenieria software, qui provide un maniera standard pro representar le designo de un systema. UML esseva originalmente motivate per le desiro de standardisar le diverse systemas e approches de notation al designo software disveloppate per Grady Booch, Ivar Jacobson e James Rumbaugh a Rational Software in 1994–1995, con plus de disveloppamento dirige per illos a transverso de 1996. In 1997 UML esseva adoptate como un standard per le Object Management Group (OMG), e ha essite administrate per iste organisation depost. In 2005 UML esseva etiam publicate per le International Organization for Standardization (ISO) como un ISO standard ISO approvate. Depost le standard ha essite periodicalmente revisate pro coperir le ultime revision de UML. Ingenieria de programmatura Abbreviationes
__label__ia Acne es un condition stationari del pelle characterisate per un obstruction del foliculos pilose per cellulas morte e sebo. Bacterios se trappa in iste foliculos obstruite. Isto causa inflammation e pustulas sur le facie, le dorso, le pectore o altere superficies del corpore. Condition cutanee Pubertate
__label__ia The Living Theatre ("Le Theatro Vivente") es un truppa theatral anarchista-pacifista fundate in 1947 per Judith Malina e Julian Beck, qui dirigeva lo juncte ante le morte de Beck in 1986 e depost per Malina usque su morte in 2015. Theatro !
__label__ia Tamás Varga (; Budapest, Hungaria le 13 de maio 1953 – ) es un sculptor hungare. Su patre, Imre Varga, esseva etiam un sculptor. Ligamines externe biographia biographia Gente hungare Sculptores
__label__ia Terra pote esser: Le planeta Terra que nos habita. Le partes superficial del planeta Terra non occupate per le mar. Vide: continente, insula. Material del qual principalmente se compone le solo natural. Vide: geologia, botanica. Terreno dedicate al cultivation o bon pro illo. Vide: agricultura. Nation, pais, region o altere location in le qual on ha nascite.
__label__ia In algebra, e plus precisemente in le theoria de gruppos, un -gruppo abelian elementari es un gruppo abelian finite, in le qual omne elemento non-trivial ha le ordine con numero prime. Un definition equivalente e que le gruppo es isomorphe al summa directe de un certe numero de gruppos cyclic del ordine . Un 2-gruppo abelian elementari se nomina un gruppo boolean. Structuras algebric
__label__ia Denise Michelle Crosby (Hollywood, California, SUA le – ) es un actrice statounitese. Su granpatre paterne esseva Bing Crosby. In le cinema su rolos include Rachel Creed in le film de Stephen King, Pet Sematary. In television, Illa deveniva famose como le locotenente Tasha Yar in le prime saison de Star Trek: The Next Generation. Postea in le mesme serie, illa jocava le filia del personage de Yar, le romulano Sela. Illa produceva le duo films (Trekkies e Trekkies 2), super le aficionados de Star Trek le plus pictoresc. Gente statounitese Actores Actrices de Star Trek
__label__ia Eventos 1940: Germania attaccava Danmark e Norvegia. Danmark acceptava le occupation le mesme die post alicun breve luctas. Le conquesta de Norvegia durava plus longe con luctas dur contra fortias britannic e francese. Nascentias Mortes Dies Festive 09
__label__ia Siderópolis es un citate del sud de Brasil in le stato de Santa Catarina. In 2009, le citate habeva habitantes. Citates limitrophe: Nova Veneza, Criciúma, Treviso, Bom Jardim da Serra, Urussanga Siderópolis
__label__ia Le Montanias Roccose, generalmente cognoscite como "Le Roccoses", es un major catena de montanias in le west de America del Nord. Le Montanias Roccose extende plus que 4.800 kilometros (3.000 millias) ab le plus septentrional parte de Columbia Britannic, in Canada del west, a Nove Mexico, in le Statos Unite del sud-west. Intra le cordillera de America del Nord, le Montanias Roccose es aliquanto distincte ab le Catena de Pacific Costa e le Catena del Cascadas e le Sierra Nevada, que omne es plus distante al west. Vide etiam Monte Montanias
__label__ia Grant's Tomb ("Le Tumba de Grant"), officialmente The General Grant National Memorial ("Le Memorial National General Grant") es le sito del restos del general e presidente statounitese Ulysses S. Grant e de su sposa, Julia Dent Grant. Le tumba es in Riverside Park in New York City e es le mauseleo le plus grande in America del Nord. Post le morte de General Grant in 1885, ~90,000 personas infra e extra del SUA donava plus que $600,000 pro construer le tumba, al tempore le plus car projecto financiate per donationes public. Grant's Tomb era designate per le architecto John Duncan e construite de granito e marmore. In 1897 plus que un million personas era al parada e ceremonias del dedication de Grant's Tomb le 27 de april 1897. Le tumba es un sito del agentia federal statounitese le National Park Service (Servicio National pro Parcos). Referentias Grant's Tomb
__label__ia Röhe es un quartiero in le west del citate Eschweiler in le region urban de Aquisgrano in Rhenania del Nord-Westfalia. Illo ha circa 2.400 habitantes. Le prime mention documentate esseva in le anno 1346. Quartieros de Eschweiler
__label__ia Le Guru Granth Sahib (in gurmukhi ਗੁਰੂ ਗ੍ਰੰਥ ਸਾਹਿਬ e in shahmukhi پنجابی) es le libro sancte del sikhismo. Il es anque cognoscite como Adi Granth, un parte del libro compilate per Guru Arjan in 1604. Pro le sikhismo non es un libro, sed un guru que los guida in lor vitas. Pro illes, illo es le guru perpetue. Il ha 1430 paginas e ha le parolas del 10 gurus del sikhismo e varios sanctos de altere religiones. Sikhismo
__label__ia {{Infobox Film | name = Bad Cat | image = Bad Cat logo.jpg | caption = | alt = | film name = Kötü Kedi Şerafettin | director = Mehmet KurtuluşAyşe Ünal | producer = Mehmet KurtuluşVehbi Berksoy | screenplay = Levent KazakBülent Üstün | based on = | starring = Uğur YücelDemet EvgarOkan Yalabık | music = Oğuz KaplangıSabri Tuluğ TırpanSerkan Çeliköz | cinematography = Barış Ulus | editing = Aylin TinelÇiğdem Yersel | studio = Anima Istanbul | distributor = Odin's Eye Entertainment | released = 5 de februario 2016 (TR) 2 de februario 2017 (PA) 23 de novembre 2017 (AR) 9 de augusto 2018 (AE) 18 de octobre 2018 (PT) | runtime = 86 minutas | country = Turchia | language = turco | budget = | gross = }} Bad Cat es un film de animation turc de 2016 producite per Anima Istanbul e basate sur le comic popular homonyme per Bülent Üstün. Le film esseva lanceate al cinemas per Odin's Eye Entertainment le 5 de februario 2016. Referentias Ligamines externe Sito official Films de animation Films comic Films super animales
__label__ia Denali es un monte in Alaska que es le monte le plus alte in America del Nord. Su summitate es 6,190 metros super le nivello del mar. Le nomine "Denali" es derivate de un parola que significa "alte" in le lingua indigene del Koyukones, un nation de indianos american qui parla un lingua in le familia Na-Dené. Denomination Inter 1917 e 2015 su nomine official in le Statos Unite era "Mount McKinley" ("Monte McKinley," in honor de William McKinley) ma le 29 de decembre 2015 Barack Obama ha annunciate le cambio official al nomine indigene "Denali" , e tres dies depost le United States Geological Survey ha annunciate que un nove mensuration del altitude del monte ha revelate que le summitate es 20,310 pedes (6,190 metros), 10 pedes (~3 metros) minus alte que ha essite pensate desde le preview mensuration in le 1950s. Ligamines externe US Geological Survey Montes Alaska
__label__ia Le Libro de Isaia (hebreo: Sefer Y'sha'yah ספר ישעיה) es un del libros del Biblia hebree del judaismo e le Vetere Testamento del christianismo, traditionalmente attribuite a Isaia. Deutero-Isaia Ab le greco deùteros, adj. secunde. In le theoria del moderne critica litterari, Deutero-Isaia es le nomine date al autor de Isaia 40-55, textos que se intende non scribite per le original Isaia. Iste theoria assere que iste ignote autor viveva verso le fin del exilio babylonian (597/587-538 a. C.). Su action de "propheta de salvation" se reputa disveloppar se inter le annos 550 e 538 a. C., quando le imperio babylonian esseva preste a su fin e le populos opprimite attendeva del rege persian Ciro lor salvator. Le Deutero-Isaia annunciava le imminente retorno del exiliatos como comenciamento del futur tempore del salvation, le qual haberea imbraciate le integre creation. Libros del Vetere Testamento de:Jesaja#Das Buch Jesaja
__label__ia 1 aEC era le ultime anno ante le Era Commun. Le proxime anno era 1 EC; il non ha un anno 0. In accordo con le calendario julian, initiava in un jovedi e esseva un anno bissextil; e secundo le calendario holocen, iste correspondeva al anno 10.000. Referentias januario februario martio april maio junio julio augusto septembre octobre novembre decembre sin data precise Seculo 1 aEC
__label__ia Le agricultura in Roma antique non solmente era un necessitate, sed era idealisate inter le élite social como forma de vita. Ciceron la considerava le melior del occupationes roman. In su tractato "Re Deberes", il declarava que "de totes les occupationes per le quales le ganio es secur, necuna el melior que le agricultura, necuna plus profitabile, necuna plus delectabile, necuna plus concrescibile por le home libere". Cato, Columella, Varro e Palladio scribeva manuales re agricultura. Economia del Roma antique agricultura
__label__ia Revelation special Un revelation special es, in alcun religions, un revelation directe e specific del voluntate de un deo. In christianismo illo existe hodie solmente per le scriptura e es uno del duo typos de revelation. Compara con: Revelation general. Connectite a: Sola Scriptura. Christianismo
__label__ia Un tabuliero de texto es un tipo simple de forum in linea; le majoritate de tabulieros de texto non require registro ni entrata de un nomine de usator. Tabulieros de texto, similemente a tabulieros de imagines, esseva inventate in Japon, ma illos remain relativemente incognite foras de ille, in contrasto a tabularios de imagines (como 4chan).
__label__ia Paradise Now (Paradiso Nunc) es un production theatral de 1968 per The Living Theatre, dirigite per Julian Beck e Judith Malina, un ludo experimental interactive inspirate per le anarchismo e pacifismo del truppa. Durante le production le actores incoragiava le audientia a fumar marijuana e disvestir. Al fin le audientia (includente multe gente nude) e le actores iva al strata in un manifestation political-theatral que frequentemente concludeva con alcun participantes arrestate per le policia local. Referentias The Living Theatre
__label__ia Michael Rosbash (nascite le 7 de martio 1944 in Kansas City, Missouri, SUA) es un geneticista statounitese. Illo es un Professor de Biologia al Universitate Brandeis e un ganiator del Premio Nobel. In 2017 ille, Jeffrey C. Hall, e Michael W. Young ha recipite le Premio Nobel pro Physiologia o Medicina "pro lor discopertas del mechanismos molecular controlante le rhythmo circadian." Ligamines externe Premio pro Physiologia o Medicina 2017 al sito official del Premio Nobel. Michael Rosbach al sito official del Premio Nobel. Gente statounitese Biologos Laureatos del Premio Nobel pro Physiologia o Medicina
__label__ia Un aeronave es un machina que pote volar per ganiar le supporto del aer, o, generalmente, del atmosphera de un planeta. Illo contraria le fortia de gravitate per usar o portantia static o le portantia dynamic de un profilo alar, o in un pauc casos le pulsata descendente de motores jectal. Le activitate human que involve le aeronaves es appellate aviation. Aeronaves equipate es conducite per un pilota a bordo, ma vehiculos aeree non equipate pote esser teleguidate o autoguidate per computatores interne. Aeronaves pote esser classificate per criterios differente, como typo de portantia, propulsion aeronaval, uso, e alteres. Alicun exemplos de aeronaves include aeroplanos, planatores, helicopteros, ballones, e dirigibiles. Vide etiam Avion Avion venatori Aviation Aeroplano in le Wiktionario Aeronave Vehiculos Referentias
__label__ia Mondaí es un citate del sud de Brasil in le stato de Santa Catarina. In 2009, le citate habeva habitantes. Citates limitrophe: Riqueza, Caibi, Iporã do Oeste, São João do Oeste e Rio Grande do Sul Mondaí
__label__ia Mustang, un racia de cavallos. Ford Mustang, automobile sportive del Ford Motor Company Fender Mustang, guitarra electric fabricate per Fender Musical Instruments. P-51 Mustang, un avion del secunde guerra mundial
__label__ia Le spiritismo es le doctrina codificate per le pedagogo francese Hippolyte Léon Denizard Rivail (1804–1869) sub le pseudonymo “druidic” Allan Kardec, qui scribeva le Libro del Spiritos (1857). Etymologicamente le parola “spiritismo” veniva del francese “spiritisme”, id es “doctrina de spiritos”. Iste parola designa le doctrina philosophic e religiose que crede in le superviventia del spiritos post morte del corpore physic e le communication del homines con le spiritos, trans le persona qui es “medium”. Le spiritismo non es un scientia. Le spiritismo crede que le homine es un spirito unite al corpore physic e su connexion existe per le corpore semi material (in francese: périsprit). Le spiritismo moderne nunquam revindicava le discoperta del communication con le spiritos, perque es credite esser un tradition ancestral cognoscite per plure civilisationes. Spiritistas affirma que in Grecia antique, le evocation del mortos e le communication con illes faceva parte integrante del religion practicate in su templos. Vide etiam Fantasma Referentias Spiritualitate
__label__ia Le Auckland Grammar School (Schola de Grammatica de Auckland) es un schola secundari sol per pueros in Auckland, Nove Zelanda. Illo insenia del grado 9 al 13. Le schola ha un numero limitate de internos, que vive in un edificio adjacente al schola. Illo es un del plus grande scholas in Nove Zelanda. Historia Le schola ha essite create per le Acto de Appopriation de Grammatica de Auckland de 1868, sed illo ha essite antedatate per le charta del schola date per le acto de fide del governator Sir George Edwar Grey in 1850 Alicun studentes notabile Sir Thomas Bavin (1874–1941), 24th Premier de Nove Galles del Sud Sir Edmund Hillary (1919–), explorator e alpinista. Le prime homine in le monte Everest in 1953-05-29 Prof Vaughan Jones (1952–), ganiator de Medalia Fields Sir Kenneth Keith (1937–), Judice in le Corte International de Justitia Sir George Laking, (1912–), diplomatico e ombudsman Referentias Ligamines externe Website official del schola Intranet del schola actualisate regularmente Nove Zelanda
__label__ia Leonhard Euler (15 de april 1707 in Basel, Switza – 18 de septembre 1783 in Sancte Petroburgo) esseva un mathematico switze de grande creativitate. Ille ha studiate in Basel sub Johann Bernoulli e in 1727 deveniva professor de physica e plus tarde de mathematica in Sancte Petroburgo, Russia. In 1741 ille iva a Berlin como membro del Academia de Berlin. In 1766 ille retornava a St. Petroburgo. Ille contribueva a quasi tote le brancas del mathematica e su applicationes a problemas physic, mesmo post que ille deveniva totalmente cec in 1771. Ille etiam es le patre del terminologia moderne de mathematica. Ille es le prime qui representa function como . Ille contribueva con iste formula. Multe conceptos familiar recipeva lor nomines in su textos, p.ex. le base logarithmic "". Gente switze Mathematicos Physicos
__label__ia Le anno de mille septe centos octanta. 1780 es le sexte anno del Guerra de Independentia del Statos Unite. januario februario martio april maio junio julio augusto septembre octobre novembre decembre sin data precise Seculo 18
__label__ia Samarra (arabe: سَامَرَّاء‎, Sāmarrāʾ) es un citate in Irak. Illo es situate al banco este del fluvio Tigris in le governatorato Saladin, 125 kilometros al nord de Bagdad. In 2003 le citate habeva un population estimate de 348,700. Durante le Guerra Civil Iraqi, Samarra esseva in le "Triangulo Sunni" de violentia. In le medievo, Samarra esseva le capital del Califato Abbasid, e es le sol capital islamic que retene su plano, architectura, e reliquias artistic original. In 2007, UNESCO nominava Samarra un de su Sitos de Patrimonio Mundial. Irak
__label__ia Le Patrimonio cultural immaterial es un lista del UNESCO que consiste in le ricchessa intellectual non-physic, como folklore, usantias, credentia, traditiones, cocinas, dansa, cognoscentia e linguages. Patrimonio Mundial
__label__ia Le communitates autonome de Espania es le le divisiones administrative espaniol del prime nivello. Cata communitate autonome ha autonomia legislative e competentias executive establite per le constitution espaniol de 1978 e per su proprie Statuto de Autonomia. Il ha dece-septe communitates autonome. Additionalmente il ha duo citates autonome, Ceuta e Melilla, e un parve numero de territorios minor, le plazas de soberanía, administrate directemente per le governamento central. Le communitates autonome es dividite in provincias (in septe casos solmente un).
__label__ia In mathematica, un toro es un figura geometric e topologic que consiste de un plano modulate como un inflation con un foramine. Illo es un solido de revolution create de un circulo. Nomines popular es pneu, cinctura de salvamento e donut. Galeria Geometria Topologia
__label__ia Arroio Trinta es un citate del sud de Brasil in le stato de Santa Catarina. In 2009, le citate habeva habitantes. Citates limitrophe: Iomerê, Macieira, Caçador, Videira,Salto Veloso e Treze Tílias Arroio Trinta
__label__ia Petralia Soprana es un communa que se trova in le Citate Metropolitan de Palermo, in le region del Sicilia, in Italia. Illo ha un population de habitantes. Communas del Citate Metropolitan de Palermo
__label__ia Corazón Aquino esseva le presidente del Philippinas in le anno 1986. Su marito Benigno Aquino Junior, leader del opposition e critico del presidente autoritari Ferdinand Marcos, esseva assassinate le 21 de augusto 1983. Postea illa reluctantemente duceva le opposition contra le regime Marcos, e deveniva le prime presidente feminin del Philippinas de 1986 usque 1992. Illa nasceva le 25 de januario 1933 in le provincia Tarlac de un familia opulente e esseva filia de Jose Cojuangco e Dimitria Sumulong. Illa studeva al Collegio De Sancte Vincente e parla francese. Illa moriva de cancere le 31 de julio 2009. Gente philippin
__label__ia Seamus Heaney (anglese: ; Castledawson, Irlanda del Nord le 13 de april 1939 – Dublin, Republica de Irlanda le 30 de augusto 2013) esseva un poeta, dramaturgo, e traductor irlandese. Ille recipeva le Premio Nobel pro Litteratura in 1995. Dramaturgos Poetas Gente irlandese Laureatos del Premio Nobel pro Litteratura
__label__ia Hippolyte Léon Denizard Rivail (Lyon, France, 1804-10-03 – Paris, 1869-03-31) esseva un pedagogo e scriptor francese. Sub le pseudonymo Allan Kardec es cognoscite como le codificator del Spiritismo (etiam Doctrina Spiritista). Nate in familia antique catholic con tradition in magistratura e advocatia, manifestava vocation per le scientias e philosophia. Studiava in Schola de Pestalozzi (Yverdun, Suice). Scribeva le Libro del Spiritos (1857), que es considerate le initio del Spiritismo. Post scribeva le Revista Spiritista e fundava le Societate Spiritista de Paris (1858). Bibliographia Kardec, Allan, Le libro del spiritos, 1857 Kardec, Allan, Le libro del mediums, 1861 Kardec, Allan, Le evangelio secunde le Spiritismo, 1864 Kardec, Allan, Le celo e le inferno, 1865 Kardec, Allan, Le genese, le miraculos e le predictiones, 1868 Gente francese
__label__ia Un prestre o sacerdote es considerate in multe religiones como un persona official qui se distingue del gentes religiose et, in attributo como chef de actos ritual, joca un rolo de meditation inter su divinitate (o lor divinitates) e le gentes. Religion Theologia christian Missa
__label__ia Terrorismo (del latino terreo, "io espaventa") es le usage systematic de terror, specialmente como un methodo de coercition. In lege international, il non ha nulle singule definition que es acceptate per le majoritate de nationes. Definition Un definition commun de terrorismo se refere al actiones violente que es intendite pro causar timor, lo qual es perpetrate pro rationes politic, religiose o ideologic e que ignora le periculo o impericula specificamente al non combattentes. Alcun definitiones exclude actiones facite per un nation (terrorismo governmental), e altere include actiones illegal bellic. Il ha etiam un defintion relate al crimine syndicate, que es le coercition violente pro profitos. Specialmente in le annos recente, le definition del terrorismo es un definition politic, e emotiones forte ha complicate le creation de un definition precise. Le termino terrorismo es controversial: governamentos, corporationes, e politicos ha usate le parola terrorismo pro dislegitimar le actiones de lor opponentes e dar appoio a lor proprie causas. Pro tal rationes, alcun medias, como le BBC, ha restringite le usage de iste parola. Galeria
__label__ia Le Republica Roman (latino: Res Publica, Rei Publicae; litt. le re public, le cosa del populo) esseva le periodo del civilisation roman que habeva un forma republican de governamento. Illo comenciava in 509 aEC cum le subversion del monarchia roman, que esseva reimplaciate per duo capites conjuncte, le Consules, eligite pro servir un anno de mandato per, e sempre consultante cum, un assemblea de Patricios dicte Senato. Durante le prime duo seculos de su existentia le Republica conquireva tote le peninsula italian. Durante le sequente seculos illo conquireva anque Africa del Nord, le Peninsula Iberic, Grecia, Gallia e un parte significante del Mediterraneo oriental. Un serie de guerras civil poneva fin al historia del Res Publica, in conducer al formation del Imperio Roman in 27 aEC. Historia de Roma
__label__ia Noemi, nomine al nascite Veronica Scopelliti, nascite le 25 de januario 1982 in Roma, es un cantatrice italian. Discographia Albumes 2009 - Sulla mia pelle (Positiones 3 Italia - Duple disco de platino, venditas 140.000+ copias) 2011 - RossoNoemi (Positiones 6 Italia - Disco de platino, venditas 60.000+ copias) 2012 - RossoLive (Positiones 11 Italia - Venditas 25.000+ copias) Extended play (EP) 2009 - Noemi (Positiones 8 Italia - Disco de auro, venditas 50.000+ copias) Singulos 2009 - Briciole (Positiones 2 Italia - Disco de auro) 2009 - L'amore di odia (con Fiorella Mannoia) (Positiones 1 Italia - Duple disco de platino) 2010 - Per tutta la vita (Positiones 1 Italia - Disco de platino) 2010 - Vertigini 2011 - Vuoto a perdere (Positiones 6 Italia - Disco de platino) 2011 - Odio tutti i cantanti 2011 - Poi inventi il modo 2012 - Sono solo parole (Positiones 3 Italia - Disco de platino) 2012 - La promessa (con Stadio) 2012 - In un giorno qualunque 2012 - Se non è amore (Positiones 46 Italia) Festival de Musica Sanremo 2010 con Per tutta la vita (Positiones 4) 2012 con Sono solo parole (Positiones 3) Gente de Roma Cantatores
__label__ia Le bassino del Donets, o Donbas (in ukrainiano: Донецький басейн, Donec'kij basejn, abbr. Донбас), note anque como Donbass (in russo: Донецкий бассейн, Doneckij bassejn, abbr. Донбасс), es le territorio circumstante le lecto del homonyme fluvio in Russia e Ukraina, importante affluente del Don. Donbas es un area historic, economic, e cultural in le regiones administrative ukrainian Donetsk e Luhansk, ma varie partes de illo in 2014 se ha declarate independente de Ukraina sub pression e collisiones militar russe. In 2022 le region ha essite invadite per le fortias armate russe sub ordine del presidente Vladimir Putin, e un referendum de annexion al Federation Russe ha essite obligate.
__label__ia Boston es le plus grande citate e le capital de Massachusetts, Statos Unite de America, in le contato Suffolk. Secundo le censo de 2000, le population del citate esseva habitantes. Citates in Massachusetts
__label__ia Le cocina philippin es un gruppo de cocinas customari associate con le habitantes del Philippinas. Le cocinas (indigene e chinese) de Sud-Est Asia e le cocina espaniol (per tres seculos del colonisation) influentia ille cocina. Ille effecto es remarcabile in plattos como le porco rostite, le preparation de ris con stylos similar al paella, e multe dessertos como le leche flan ("lacte flan"), brazo de mercedes ("brachio de misericordias"), tocino de cielo ("lardo de celo"), e lengua de gato ("lingua de catto"). Generalmente, philippinos traditionalmente face tres repastos quotidian: almusal (jentaculo per philippino), tanghalian (prandio per philippino), e hapunan (cena per philippino), plus un aperitivo o repastetto postmeridian, nominate meryenda. Le cocina philippin sovente usa ingredientes tropic como le taro o le igname de ube. Philippinas
__label__ia Le Canal de Panama es un 82 kilometro canal naval in Panama que connecte le Oceano Atlantic (via le Mar Caribbean) al Oceano Pacific. Le canal seca a transverso le Isthmo de Panama e es un conducto importante pro commercio maritime international. Travalio sur le canal, que comenciava in 1880, esseva completate in 1914. Le canal eliminava le necessitate pro vascellos de navigar le route longe de Capo Horn, circa le plus del sud extremitate de America del Sud, e de navigar le aquas periculose del Strictos de Magellan. Un del plus grande e plus difficile projectos de ingenieria jam interprendite, le via directissime del Canal de Panama possibilisava pro naves de ir inter le Oceanos Atlantic e Pacific in un medie le tempore previemente requirite. Un plus curte, plus rapide, plus salve route al costa del west del Statos Unite e a nationes in e preter le Oceano Pacific permitteva los locos de devenir plus integrate con le economia del tote mundo. Vide etiam Canal Panama Zona del Canal de Panama Referentias
__label__ia Sardinia es un insula in le Mediterraneo e un region de Italia. Sardinia pote etiam referer se a: Regno de Sardinia regno anterior (1324–1861), predecessor del hodierne Italia. Sardinia (Nove York), municipalitate in Nove York, SUA Sardinia (Ohio), village in Ohio, SUA
__label__ia Santa Maria della Versa es un municipalitate que se trova in le provincia de Pavia, in le region del Lombardia, in Italia. Illo ha un population de habitantes. Municipalitates del provincia de Pavia
__label__ia Le Universal Tempore Coordinate (UTC), cognoscite etiam como le tempore civil, es le fuso horari de referentia desde que tote le altere fusos horari del mundo es calculate. Illo es le successor del Tempore Medie de Greenwich (GMT), e alicun vices es ancora appellate GMT. Le nove nomine esseva create pro evitar le necessitate de mentionar un localitate determinate in un standard international. Le UTC se basa sur mesurationes ducite per horologios atomic in vice de phenomenos celeste como le GMT.
__label__ia Le Stricto de Taiwan o Stricto de Formosa es le stricto inter Taiwan e le provincia chinese de Fujian. Le distantia inter le insula e Asia continental es circa 130 kilometros al minimo. Referentias Asia Strictos
__label__ia Metanarration es concepto postmoderne de un conto que ha un appello universal e non denega le concepto de veritate de quicunque. Fundamentalmente, interpretar un scripto subjectivemente pro significar quecunque tu vole que illo significa in un date situation e secundo le proprie personal predilectiones. Connectite a: Postmoderne, Deconstructionismo. Philosophia
__label__ia Le intelligentia artificial (curte: IA o AI per Artificial Intelligence) es un campo del informatica con le objectivo de disveloppar machinas con un conducta intelligente. Le progressos es significante in alicun campos importante como le recognoscentia automatic de imagines e de linguas parlate o programmas per exemplo jocante chacos o go. Le intelligentia artificial es implementate per le linguages de programmation como per Lisp, Python, C++, Java, e Prolog. Le superintelligentia es un speculation super un forma artificial de intelligentia que superpassarea le intelligentia human. Le IA es un thema frequente in filmes del scientia fictive como in Star Wars de George Lucas, Forbidden Planet de Fred Wilcox, The Matrix del Wachowskis, 2001: A Space Odyssey de Stanley Kubrick, e A.I. Artificial Intelligence de Steven Spielberg. Intelligentia artificial Informatica
__label__ia Hermes es un deitate del mythologia grec, le filio de Zeus e Hera e un del duodece deos olympie. Le deo de messageros, scribas commercio, robamento, e altere formas de cambio, ille es syncretisate al deo Mercurio in mythologia roman. Deos olympie
__label__ia René Gaston Jacobs, (4 de octobre 1920), esseva inseniante; ille esseva parlanto del lingua Interlingua, tamben redactor de Unir (Organo de Union Interlinguiste de France, UIF ), secretario del UIF (-1993), vice-presidente (1993-2002) e membro del Consilio del Union Mundial pro Interlingua (UMI) (desde 1988). Referentias Parlatores de interlingua Pioneros de interlingua
__label__ia Le Tractato de Utrecht, anque cognoscite como Pace de Utrecht o Tractatos de Utracht e Rastadt es un serie de tractatos multilatere firmate per le paises belligerente in le Guerra del Succession Espaniol inter le anios 1712 e 1714 in istas citates del Paises Basse e Germania. Tractatos de pace Historia de Espania
__label__ia Le basketball (latinisate: ballacorbe) es, secundo le regulas official del FIBA, un sport spheristic que es jocate per duo equipas de cinque jocatores. Le objectivo es facer punctos per poner le balla in le corbe (basket) del opponente e impedir que illo obtene le controlo del balla e face punctos. Sports olympic Sport
__label__ia In mathematica un monoide es un structura algebric, a saper un semigruppo con un elemento neutre. Omne gruppo es un monoide, ma al contrario un monoide non ha necessarimente elementos inverse. Vide etiam Numero natural Semireticulo Tabella de leges algebric Structuras algebric
__label__ia Quando se invia datos per Internet, cata pacchetto de datos transmittite include informationes de capite e le datos mesme a inviar. Le capite identifica le origine e destination del pacchetto, e le datos mesme se appella le carga utile (anglese: payload). Post que le informationes de capite constitue datos supplementari que se usa solmente durante le processo de transmission, illos se dismonta del pacchetto quando illo attinge su destination. Ergo, le carga utile es le sol datos recipite per le systema de destination. Referentias http://www.pcmag.com/encyclopedia_term/0,2542,t=payload&i=48909,00.asp http://www.securityfocus.com/glossary/P http://www.techterms.com/definition/payload
__label__ia Un flecha o sagitta es un projectil punctute que generalmente se tira con un arco o alcun altere typo de arma. Illo pote etiam esser omne symbolo, typographic o altere, similar a → e serviente typicamente a indicar un direction. Referentias definition de flèche, TLFi Armas
__label__ia Le glandulas endocrin son le glandulas que secreta su productos, le hormones, directemente ad sanguine sin ducto. Le major glandulas include le glandula pineal, glandula pituitari o hypophyse, pancreas, ovarios, testiculos, thyroide, parathyroide, hypothalamo e glandulas suprarenal. Le hypothalamo e hypophyse son organos neuroendocrin. Systema endocrin
__label__ia In physica, le dynamica es un branca que studia le corpores in movimento. Adynamia [a-di-ná-mia] Etymologia: Ab le greco a pro "non" e dynamis "fortia" o "poter" Definition: Deficentia de energia, o deficientia de fortia vital. Terminos relationate: Adynation Dynamo Physica
__label__ia Muhammad Ali (Louisville (Kentucky), 17 de januario 1942 – Scottsdale, Arizona, 3 de junio 2016) esseva un boxator statounitese. Ille nasceve con le nomine Cassius Clay. Ille se converteva al islam e ille converteva su nomine ad Muhammad Ali. In le Jocos Olympic ille deveniva un champion. Gente statounitese Boxatores
__label__ia Dominio pote significar: In informatica: Dominio (internet), un nomine registrate in le systema DNS de internet In biologia: Dominio (rango taxonomic) In mathematica: Dominio (mathematica) Dominio de integritate es un altere nomine pro un anello de integritate
__label__ia Le violoncello o cello es un instrumento musical de chordas. Le violoncello ha quatro chordas que es accordate usualmente al notas C2, G2, D3 e A3 — un octava plus grave que le chordas de un viola. Le differentia inter le chordas es un quinto. Le musica del violoncello es usualmente scribite in le clavo de basso. Al contrario al violino e viola, le violoncello reposa in parte sur le solo quand illo es sonate. Illo es sonate per un archetto o rarmente pizzicate. Le violoncello esseva inventate circa 1660. Illo es derivate ab un forma del violino. Il ha un repertoire grande pro violoncello. Illo es usate in orchestras, quartettos de chordas e como solo-instrumento. Alcun vices, le violoncello es usate in jazz e musica popular. Instrumentos musical
__label__ia Le azerios (note anque como: azerbaijanos o turcos azerie; in azerio: Azəriler, آذریلر, Azərbaycanlılar, آذربایجانلیلار, o Azərbaycan Türkləri, آذربایجان تۆرکلری‎) son un populo turchic vivente principalmente in le area nord-occidental de Iran e in le Republica Azerie. Cum un hereditate ethnocultural mixte date per lor position eurasiatic central, que include elementos caucasic, turc, e persian, le azerios son le secunde gente turcophone le plus numerose post le turcos, e professa prevalentemente le islam siita. Lor lingua native es le azerio, un lingua pertinente al branca sud-occidental del linguas turchic, e le sol official in Azerbaijan.
__label__ia Le Cantones de Switza (, , , ) es le vinti-sex statos membros (statos federate) que constitue le Confederation Switze. Cata canton ha su proprie constitution e corpores legislative, executive, e judicial, generalmente de forma republican. Le cantones conserva tote le poteres que non es explicitemente delegate al Confederation per le constitution o leges federal. Vide etiam Canton
__label__ia Le linguas iranic (codice ISO 639-2 e ISO 639-5: ira) es un branca del familia linguistic indoeuropee, con un numero estimate de 150-200 milliones de locutores matrilingue. Cum le linguas indoaryan illo forma le gruppo indoiranic. Le avestico e le persiano ancian, comprense in le branca iranic, es duo del linguas indoeuropee de plus antique attestation (cum le sanscrito, le vedico, le greco e le hittita). Linguas iranic parlate hodie include persa, curdo, baluchi, luri, e pashto.
__label__ia Le Committee Economic e Social Europee es un organo auxiliar del Union Europee, create per le Tractato constitutive del Communitate Economic Europee in 1958 con le scopo de representar le intereses del distincte grupos economic e social de Europa. Institutiones del Union Europee
__label__ia Un dispositivo medical es qualcunque apparato, programmatura, materia o un altere articulo, sia usatate solo sia in combination, includente in programmatura intendente ab su fabricantes pro esser usate ad hoc pro propositos diagnostic e/o therapeutic. Applicationes Diagnosis, prevention, monente, tractamento o allevation del morbo; Diagnosis, monente, tractamento, alleviation o compensation per un injuria o debilitate; Investigation, reimplaciamento o modification del anatomia o processo physiological; Controlo de conception, in que non comple su action proposite principal super le corpore humano per medio pharmacological, immunological o metabolic. Medicina Utensiles Hospital
__label__ia In physica, densitate (denotate ρ) es le massa continite per unitate de volumine. Densitate es un specie de scalar quantitate physic e es un mesura del concentration de materia. Il ha dimensions de massa per longitude cubite. Unitates Unitates de densitate include: Kilogramma per metros cubic (unitate del SI) Gramma per centrimetros cubic (unitate del CGS) Libra (avoirdupois) per pede cubic Vide etiam Massa Volumine Referentias Quantitate physic
__label__ia Bambi es un film de animation statounitese de 1942 producite per Walt Disney e basate in le libro Bambi. Eine Lebensgeschichte aus dem Walde (traduction in Interlingua: Bambi, un vita in le foreste) per autor austriac Felix Salten. Le film esseva lanceate al cinemas per RKO Radio Pictures le 13 de augusto 1942 e es le quinte film animate de Disney. Ligamines externe Sito official Films de animation Films comic Films de drama Films super animales Films de Disney Films musical
__label__ia Canada Damascus, New Brunswick Statos Unite Damascus, Arkansas Damascus, Georgia Damascus, Maryland Damascus, Ohio Damascus, Oregon Damascus, Pennsylvania Damascus Township, Wayne County, Pennsylvania Damascus, Virginia
__label__ia Caule (comprehendente plure cultivares de Brassica oleracea) es un planta biennial foliate verde, rubie (purpure), o blanc (verde clarette) cultivate como un annual vegetal pro su capites densemente-foliate. Vide etiam Sauerkraut Brassica oleracea Cultivares Vegetales
__label__ia Jacinto Machado es un citate del sud de Brasil in le stato de Santa Catarina. In 2009, le citate habeva habitantes. Citates limitrophe: Praia Grande, Sombrio, Ermo, Turvo, Timbé do Sul, Cambará do Sul (RS) Jacinto Machado
__label__ia Oia es un municipalitate que se trova in le provincia de Pontevedra, in le communitate autonome de Gallecia, Espania. Illo ha un population de habitantes. Municipalitates in le provincia de Pontevedra
__label__ia Stanisław Mateusz Ignacy Wyspiański (nascite le 15 de januario 1869, Cracovia, morite le 28 de novembre 1907, Cracovia) esseva un dramaturgo, poeta, pictor, inscenator, architecto e ebenista polonese. Ille ha essite un del artistas europee le plus prolific e remarcabile de su epocha. Ille combinava le Arte Nove con historias polonese. In le vitrages del ecclesia de Kraków (Cracovia), ille manifesta un grande dose de emotivitate religiose. Su modernismo deveni quasi flammante. Ille ha scribite dramas super le societate polonese, del qual le plus cognite resta Le Nuptia, filmate in 1970 per Andrzej Wajda. Obras Warszawianka, 1898 Wesele, 1901 (Le Nuptia) Noc listopadowa, 1904 (Nocte de novembre) Akropolis, 1904 (Acropole) Sędziowie, 1907 (Le judices) Skałka, 1907 Vide etiam Appendice:Lista de scriptores polonese Ligamines externe Wyspiański stained-glasses Gente polonese Pictores Scriptores Poetas
__label__ia Kikki Danielsson (24 de maio 1952 in Visselfota, Svedia) es un cantatrice svedese. Discographia Rock n' Yodel (1979) Just like a Woman (1981) Kikki (1982) Varför är kärleken röd? (1983) Singles Bar (1983) Midnight Sunshine (1984) Kikkis 15 bästa låtar (1984) Bra vibrationer (1985) Papaya Coconut (1986) Min barndoms jular (1987) Canzone d'Amore (1989) På begäran (1990) Vägen hem till dej (1991) Jag ska aldrig lämna dig (1993) 100% Kikki (2001) Fri - En samling (2001) Nu är det advent (2001) I dag & i morgon (2006) Kikkis bästa (2008) Första dagen på resten av mitt liv (2011) Postcard from a Painted Lady (2015) Christmas Card from a Painted Lady (2016) Portrait of a Painted Lady (2017) Cantatores Gente svedese‎
__label__ia Dugald McPhail, in le serie Harry Potter scripte per J. K. Rowling, era le ministro pro magia britannic 1858-1865. Su predecessor era Priscilla Dupont e su successor era Faris “Spout-hole” Spavin. McPhail (cuje prenomine e supernomine son scote) clarmente es de Scotia. Ille non parla in le lingua anglese de Anglaterra ma in su lingua-soror le lingua scote basse. Rowling cita su parolas (in scote basse) in explicar proque necun "prime ministro muggle" ha visitate le Ministerio de Magia: "Their puir wee braines couldnae cope wi’ it." In anglese isto serea: "Their poor little brains couldn't cope with it." Le significantia es: "Lor povre parve cerebros non poterea manear lo." Referentias Personages de Harry Potter
__label__ia Quarz es un mineral con le formula chimic SiO2. Illo es le secunde mineral le plus abundante in le crusta terrestre. Su systema crystallin es trigonal. Quarz es un del minerales le plus importante in le industria. Crystallos de quarz es anque usate como gemmas. Mineral Geologia Parolas de origine german
__label__ia Diego Rodríguez de Silva y Velázquez (Sevilla, 6 de junio 1599 - 6 de augusto 1660) esseva un pinctor qui esseva le artista principe in le corte del rege Felipe IV. Il esseva un artista del stilo baroco, specialmente de portraites. In addition al renditiones de plure scenas historic o cultural, il faceva dozenas de portraites del familiar regal espaniol, altere personas europee notabile, e gente commun, culminante in su obra maestral Las Meninas in 1656. In le prime quartiero del seculo 19, le arte de Velázquez esseva usate como un modello pro le stilos de realismo e impressionismo, specialmente Édouard Manet. Post que su morte, plure artistas (como Picasso, Salvador Dalí, e Francis Bacon) ha dava homage a Velázquez per recrear un de su obras. Gente espaniol Pictores
__label__ia Cunha Porã es un citate del sud de Brasil in le stato de Santa Catarina. In 2009, le citate habeva habitantes. Citates limitrophe: Maravilha, Modelo, Saudades, Cunhataí, Palmitos, Caibi, Riqueza, Iraceminha Cunha Porã
__label__ia Propheta ( Hebraice נבי (nābī) , Grece προφητης (prophētēs)), es que secundo religion accepta declaratio de Deo aut alia divinitate per vision, audition aut in sonio et reporta ad populo. Ligamines externe De Propheta(Germano) Etymologia verbo"propheta" (Anglese) De prohetia apud Catholica Encyclopedia Portal Portal del Religion Religion
__label__ia Velau esseva un quartiero in le nord-west del citate Eschweiler in le region urban de Aquisgrano in Rhenania del Nord-Westfalia. Illo esseva le plus vetule parte del village Hehlrath e habeva 300 habitantes. In 1950, le village esseva detruite a causa de un mina a celo aperte de lignite. Quartieros de Eschweiler Localitates disparite
__label__ia Canelinha es un citate del sud de Brasil in le stato de Santa Catarina. In 2008, le citate habeva habitantes. Citates limitrophe: Biguaçu, Brusque, Camboriú, Nova Trento, São João Batista e Tijucas Canelinha
__label__ia Caderzone Terme es un municipalitate que se trova in le provincia de Trento, in le region de Trentino-Alto Adige, in Italia. Illo ha un population de habitantes. Municipalitates del provincia de Trento
__label__ia Ab Urbe condita (Ab le fundation del Urbe, o plus litteralmente: Ab Urbe fundate) es un opera scribite per Tito Livio que narra le historia de Roma desde su fundation, datate le 21 de april 753 a.Chr. (1 AUC) per Marco Terentio Varron e alicun investigatores moderne. Le historia esseva scripte durante le principato de Cesare Augusto, e cognosceva fortuna quasi instantanee. Illo exalta le virtutes de antique romanos como Lucio Junio Bruto e le tres Horatios. Circa 25% del texto supervive, 35 del 142 libros original (un «libro» equivale approximativemente a un «capitulo» moderne). Le libros supervivente son le 1-10, con le prefacio, le 21-45 (ma il ha lacunas importante in le libros 41 e 43-45). On ha discoperte anque un fragmento considerabile del libro 91. On aggruppa series de dece libros in «decades». Le obra es scripte in prosa latin. Le prime e tertie decades de libros ha le reputation de esser de excellente latinitate, de sorta que illos figura quasi sempre in le curriculos de latino del Etate de Auro. Post le prime trenta libros, le qualitate del prosa de Ab Urbe condita degenera, deveniente prolixe e pauco dramatic. Historia de Roma Libros
__label__ia Amala Shankar (bengali: অমলা শংকর; nate Amala Nandy le - ) era un dansator Indian, le sposa del dansator e choreographo Uday Shankar, le matre del musico Ananda Shankar e le actrice Mamata Shankar, e le soror affin del musico and compositor Ravi Shankar. Amala Shankar era un actrice in le film Kalpana scripte, co-producite e dirigite per su poso Uday Shankar. Biographia Amala Shankar ha nate como Amala Nandy in 1919. In 1931, al etate de 11 annos, illa iva al Exhibition Colonial International in Paris ubi illa incontrava Uday Shankar e su familia. Illa affiliava se con le truppa de Uday Shankar e e in 1942 illa e Uday ha sposate se. Lor prime filio, Ananda Shankar, ha nate in decembre de 1942 e lor filia Mamata Shankar in januario de 1955. Kalpana Amala Shankar representava le personage de Uma in le film Kalpana (1948), scripte, co-producite, e dirigite per Uday Shankar, qui alsi appareva in le film. Referentias Dansatores Gente bengali Familia Shankar Actrices del cinema Indian Centenarios
__label__ia Slovio es un lingua artificial con vocabulario slave create per Mark Hučko como un lingua auxiliar international. Secundo le autor un equipo de dece-quatro linguistas e instructores, plus un universitate (le Universitate de Komensky in Bratislava) adjutava in crear Slovio. Benque basate sur le linguas slave, illo es multo como Esperanto in le practic usage, tanto que le 'Esperantismos' face le lingua non-Slave al costo de regularitate. Controversia Il ha plure criticas del Slovio, pro varie rationes. Le plus commun critica de Slovio es como su creator, Mark Hučko, odia derivationes de Slovio. Pro isto, ille ha ponite le grammatica e le dictionario sub un restrictive copyright, specialmente create contra 'conlinguistas.' Iste ha date pavor a parlatores, qui a vices crede que Mark Hučko facerea un lite si un parlator usate un parola que non esse in le Slovio dictionario. Slovio tamben suffre de un frequente cambiamentos grammatical. Iste causava derision de altere conlinguistas, specialmente esperantistas. Ligamines externe Official pagina web de Slovio Linguas artificial
__label__ia In le systema numeral binari, le numeros consiste de combinationes de cifras ex un collection de duo, normalmente le cifras 0 e 1. Un tal cifra es appellate un bit (anglese: Binary digIT o pecietta). Como converter de binari a decimal Dicite de modo simple: Calcula pro cata cifra binari 1 le valor del numero. Un numero binari de 6 cifras, per exemplo 101101, es traducite in (del sinistra al dextra) 32, 8, 4 e 1; cata 1 in le numero binari es addite. Le summa 32 + 8 + 4 + 1 = 45 es le valor de iste numero binari. Informatica Mathematica
__label__ia Clonage es le processo de crear un copia identic de un original. Un clon in le senso biologic, per consequente, es un organismo multicellular que es identic geneticamente a un altere organismo vivente. Alcun vices isto pote referer se a clones "natural" producite quando un organismo se reproduce asexualmente, mais in linguage commun le clon es un copia identic per medio de intelligentia e designo identic. Le termino esseva cuneate per le geneticista britannic J. B. S. Haldane in 1963, e se deriva del vocabulo grec κλων ("micre ramo"). In biologia, le termino "clonage" es usate in duo contextos: clonage de un gene, o clonage de un organismo. Clonage human Le clonage human es un subjecto de grande controversia quanto a su consequentias ethic e practic. Vide etiam Genoma Genoma human Biologia
__label__ia Cícero Moraes (Chapecó, 1982-11-13) es specialista in reconstruction facial forense in tres dimensiones, un technica que usa un cranio pro portraitar le facie que un individuo habeva quando ille viveva. Ille deveniva celebre per dar un facie al restos mortal de Sancte Antonio de Padua e ha reconstructe septe facies plus de sanctos e anque de figuras historic como le poeta Francesco Petrarca e le Senior de Sipán.
__label__ia Friedrich Dürrenmatt (Germano: [ˈfriːdrɪç ˈdʏrənˌmat]; 5 de januario 1921 – 14 de decembre 1990) esseva un scriptor e dramaturgo switze. Ille creava su proprie typo de tragicomedia, un fusion de tragedia e comedia. Obras de Dürrenmatt de iste typo es Le visita del dama vetule (Der Besuch der alten Dame, 1956) e Le physicos (Die Physiker, 1962). Gente switze Romanceros Dramaturgos Scriptores Litteratura in le lingua german
__label__ia Gilles Deleuze (Paris le 18 de januario 1925 – Paris le 4 de novembre 1995) esseva un philosopho francese, considerate inter le plus importante e influente del seculo 20. Desde 1960 usque su morte ille scribeva numerose obras philosophic super historia del philosophia, politica, litteratura, cinema e pictura. Philosophos Gente francese
__label__ia Nagasaki (in japonese: 長崎 "capo longe") es un citate in Japon. Illo acquire un notorietate global durante le Secunde Guerra Mundial, quando, le 9 de augusto 1945, deveni le objectivo del secunde e ultime utilisation de armas nuclear sur homine in le historia, in le attacco statounitese que cum 64 000 victimas pone fin al conflicto in le Theatro del Pacifico. Citates in Japon
__label__ia Un quffa (del arabe quffa) esseva un barca de corbe ronde, tressate de canna. Illo esseva traditional sur le fluvios Euphrate e Tigris in Irak usque al annos 1970. Galeria Vehiculos Parolas de origine arabe
__label__ia Le die del picnic ha venite.
__label__ia Le arbores ha comenciate a gemmar.
__label__ia Io va reposar ante que io sorti.
__label__ia Ideas verde incolor dormi furiosemente.
__label__ia Io non sape como ir illac.
__label__ia Iste parola non se traduce ben.
__label__ia Ille es rarmente de bon humor.
__label__ia Ille se rememora le auto de Sr. Black.
__label__ia Ama tu le oranges?
__label__ia Quando ha tu arrivate?
__label__ia Continua a natar usque a tu limite.
__label__ia Io scribe un littera.
__label__ia A que hora te leva tu normalmente?
__label__ia Ille faceva un signo de capite a me.
__label__ia Io ama canes e mi soror ama cattos.
__label__ia Mi catto ha occidite iste mus.
__label__ia Io dicera un precaria pro te.
__label__ia Io es un heroe.
__label__ia Qui es le proprietario de iste auto?
__label__ia Require vos moneta?
__label__ia Iste calcettas es dispare.
__label__ia Iste parola non es ben traducibile.
__label__ia Tu pote haber iste libro gratuitemente.
__label__ia Io habeva toxemia durante mi graviditate.
__label__ia Iste edificio es in construction.
__label__ia Le reformistas resiste.
__label__ia Le crita me eveliava de mi somno.
__label__ia Io scribe un littera electronic a mi fratre.
__label__ia Nos non le cognosce.
__label__ia Le edificio es in construction.
__label__ia Le libros es ora accessibile a omnes.
__label__ia Cata regula ha su exception.
__label__ia Ha tu jam volate in un ballon de aere calide?
__label__ia Io va al schola a pede.
__label__ia Le vacca nos da lacte.
__label__ia Non es como si ille non pote currer rapidemente.
__label__ia Ille esseva in favor del proposition.
__label__ia Io vide un libro.
__label__ia In iste libro, il ha multe belle illustrationes.
__label__ia Diverte te al festa, John.
__label__ia Le senior sta ante un banco.
__label__ia Isto es vermente un problema.
__label__ia Le causa del incendio esseva su fin de cigaretta.
__label__ia Io ha affectionate le aventura desde mi infantia.
__label__ia Illes avantiava lentemente.
__label__ia Alcuno veniva!
__label__ia Io multo apprecia vostre consilio.
__label__ia Es necessari que tu consulta un medico.
__label__ia Excusa me.
__label__ia Io dormiva de un a quatro horas iste postmeridie.
__label__ia Il ha exceptiones a omne regula.
__label__ia Le senior es elegante.
__label__ia Ha vos vadite in un del jardines celebre?
__label__ia Ille nunquam manca de venir visitar me cata die.
__label__ia Le die del picnic ha arrivate.
__label__ia Non time errar.
__label__ia Ubi es le ambassada de Japon?
__label__ia Le libro es grande.
__label__ia Non me importa qui gania.
__label__ia Bon vespere.
__label__ia Mi soror ama bonbones.
__label__ia Io vide un senior e un seniora.
__label__ia Io ama le sol.
__label__ia Il ha nihil de mal con ille.
__label__ia Illes pulsava su corpore del ponte in le aqua.
__label__ia Io es felice.
__label__ia Mi matre es legier, allegre e affabile.
__label__ia Le libro es blanc.
__label__ia Io parla interlingua.
__label__ia Ubi es le vodka?
__label__ia Io veni a te immediatemente.
__label__ia Illa non suffre de timiditate.
__label__ia Io habeva toxemia durante mi pregnantia.
__label__ia Su condition se pejorava heri.
__label__ia Ille vadeva skiar in Hokkaido.
__label__ia Lo importante non es quante libros tu lege, ma qual libros tu lege.
__label__ia Io le intervideva durante que ille tornava circa le angulo.
__label__ia Interlingua es un instrumento moderne de communication international.
__label__ia Le ballon descendeva gradualmente a mesura que le aere sortiva.
__label__ia Milliones de homines comprende interlingua a prime vista.
__label__ia Le typhon se approximara al districto de Kanto a circa duo horas del postmeridie.
__label__ia Le anthropologo dice que costumes bizarre persiste in le region.
__label__ia Io prefere seder legente in le bibliotheca a ir a casa.
__label__ia Iste libro es si facile que mesmo un infante pote leger lo.
__label__ia Le leader del partito garrulava multo extensemente super futur politicas.
__label__ia Nos tentava tanto de meliorar le cosas pro nostre infantes que nos los rendeva pejor.
__label__ia Quando io emigrava al Statos Unite quatro annos retro, io me adaptava con difficultate a un nove lingua e cultura.
__label__ia Ille sapeva ben convincer mi filia de su historia deceptive.
__label__ia Memora ben que nos hereditara le resultatos de vostre decisiones.
__label__ia Debeva tu divider un camera a dormir con tu fratres o sorores?
__label__ia Es il ver que "Gratias" in vietnamese sona como "Come on"?
__label__ia Prendite per surprisa, io non poteva pensar a qualcosa a dicer.
__label__ia OK, tu debe tacer durante que nos es in le magazin.
__label__ia Tote le esseres human nasce libere e equal in dignitate e in derectos. Illes es dotate de ration e de conscientia e debe ager le unes verso le alteres in un spirito de fraternitate.
__label__ia Al etate de sex annos ille habeva apprendite a usar le machina a scriber, e diceva al maestro que ille non habeva besonio de apprender a scriber a mano.
__label__io Tarnówka esas vilajo en provinco Łódź, distrikto Zduńska Wola, komono Szadek, Polonia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2011, ol havis habitanti (52,2% esis mulieri). Ol distas cirkume 35 kilometri sud-weste de Łódź e 150 kilometri sud-weste de Warszawa. Tarnówka
__label__io Orenthal James Simpson (n. ye la 9ma di julio 1947 en San Francisco Kalifornia), surnominita la suko, esas championo (maxim rapideso) di Usana futbalo qua akuzesis pri l'asasino di lua ex-spozino Nicole e lia amigo Ronald. En maxim mediala penala proceso esis absolvita ma pos en civila judicio pro min pruvo-charjo ilu kondamnesis pagar enorma pekuniala sumo. Usana sportisti
__label__io Batmönhiyn Erhembayar (n. ye la 28ma di julio 1991) esas Mongoliana futbalisto (defensisto). Seniorala kariero Klubala de 2012 – Erchim Esquadala Il ludis por nacionala esquado di Mongolia de 2013 ganante 1 golo en 7 konkursi. Referi Mongoliana futbalisti
__label__io Wiewiórka esas vilajo en provinco Łódź, distrikto Wieruszów, komono Bolesławiec, Polonia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2011, ol havis habitanti (48,0% esis mulieri). Ol distas cirkume 110 kilometri sud-weste de Łódź e 225 kilometri sud-weste de Warszawa. Referi Wiewiórka
__label__io La yaro 1427 (MCDXXVII per Romala algarismi) esis ordinara yaro komencinta ye merkurdio segun Juliala kalendario. Ol esis la 427ma yaro di la duesma yarmilo, la 27ma yaro di la 15ma yarcento, e la 8ma yaro di la yari 1420a. Eventi Naski 30ma di novembro - Rejulo Kasimir la 4ma di Polonia (m. 1492) Morti septembro - Gentile da Fabriano, Italiana piktisto (n. c. 1370) Yari 1420a
__label__io Harkiv (Ukrainane: Харків) esas la 2ma maxim populoza urbo di Ukraina. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2014, ol havis habitanti. Lua tota surfaco esas 350 km². Ol esas administrala centro di la provinco samnoma, e nun esas importanta centro kulturala, ciencala, edukala, transportala ed industriala di la lando. Harkiv fondesis en 1654 kom fortreso, e kreskis til divenir importanta industriala e komercala centro en Ukraina dum Rusa imperio. Dum la komenco dil 20ma yarcento la majoritato di lua habitanti esis etniale Rusa, ma ante komencar la duesma mondomilito la maxim multa esis Ukrainani. La Nacional Universitato di Harkiv, fondita en 1804, esas la maxim anciena de Ukraina ed un ek la maxim importanta universitati di la lando. Urbi en Ukraina Harkiv
__label__io Autonoma Republiko Socialista Sovietiana Dagestan esis autonoma regiono di Soviet-Uniono en Kaukazia, existinta en yari 1921-1991. Chef-urbo dil republiko esis Mahachkala. Kreado dil republiko koncernis Sovietiana projeto etniala korenizo, qua prenis autonomeso por regioni plu frue opresita da Rusa imperio. En 1991 sucedanto di ARSS Dagestan divenis republiko Dagestan. Soviet-Uniono
__label__io Nero Claudius Drusus (38 a.K. – 9 a.K.) esis Romana generalo, stifa filiulo di Augustus ed exekutero di lua tala-nomizita Elbe-politiko (pacifo en la regiono nord-Germanal inter Rheno ed Elbe). Por diplazigar plu rapide ilua trupi il exkavigis ck. 10 a.K. kanalo de la Rheno (probable) al Utrechtse Vecht (‘Drusus-kanalo’), per qua il povis plu facile atingar la lago Flevo (lago IJssel) e la Vad-maro. Romana Imperio
__label__io Regiono Habarovsk esas un ek subdividuri di Rusia an Pacifiko. Ol subdividesas en 19 distrikti, ed olua chefurbo esas Habarovsk. Segun la kontado di 2022, la regiono havis habitanti. Ye 2010 la granda majoritato di la habitanti esas rusi (91,8 %), pose: ukraini (2,1 %), nanaii (0,8 %), koreani (0,6 %) e tatari (0,6 %). Precipua loki De loki en la republiko super 15 000 habitanti esas: Distrikti De 19 distrikti esas 2 urbi kom legitima distrikti: Habarovsk e Komsomolsk-na-Amure. La cetera 17 distrikti esas: Amursk, Ayan, Bikin, Bogorodskoye, Chegdomin, Chumikan, Imeni Polini Osipenko, Komsomolsk-na-Amure, Nikolayevsk-na-Amure, Ohotsk, Pereyaslavka, Solnechni, Sovetskaya Gavan, Troickoye, Habarovsk, Vanino e Vyazemski. Referi Regiono Habarovsk
__label__io Gregorowce esas vilajo en provinco Podlakia, distrikto Bielsk Podlaski, komono Orla, Polonia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2011, ol havis habitanti. Ol distas cirkume 8 kilometri sud-weste de komono-sideyo (Orla), 14 kilometri sud-este de chefurbo dil distrikto (Bielsk Podlaski), 54 kilometri sud-este de chefurbo dil provinco (Białystok), e 160 kilometri nord-este de Warszawa. Referi Gregorowce
__label__io Ciosta esas lago en estala Bielorusia, provinco Viciebsk, distrikto Haradok. Lo situesis en baseno di rivero Ovsyanka (dextra enfluanto di Usvyacha en baseno di Daugava) – proxim vilaji Sieliazni e Sialo, 33 kilometri nord-este de urbo Haradok, e 11 kilometri di frontiero Bielorusia – Rusia. Referi Ciosta
__label__io linguala ideologio esas koncepto uzata precipue en antropologio, sociolinguistiko, ed interkulturala studii por karakterizar ula ensemblo di kredaji koncerne l'uzo di ula linguo en lua socio. Kande agnoskata ed explorata, linguala ideologii expozas konekti inter la kredaji parolanti havas pri linguo e la larja sociala e kulturala sistemi esas parto di, ilustranta quale ta kredaji esas informita da e radikizita en ta sistemi. Per agar tale, linguala ideologii juntas l'implicita tam explicita supozi homi havas pri linguo o linguo en generalo a lua sociala experienco e politikala tam ekonomikala interesti. Ideologii Sociolinguistiko
__label__io Yangjae (양재역, 良才驛) esas staciono che lineo 3 dil urbala ferovoyo di Seoul, Sud-Korea. Ol esis termino-staciono di ca lineo til 1993, kande ol extensesis a Suseo. Ye la 28ma di oktobro 2011, ol divenis transfero-staciono kun tale nomizita lineo Shinbundang. Yangjae
__label__io Eintracht Frankfurt (konocata anke kom Adler o SGE) esas profesionala futbalo-klubo establisita en Frankfurt am Main. Ol partoprenas en Bundesliga. Ol fondesis ye la 8ma di marto 1899. Olua stadio, Waldstadion, inauguresis en 1925, e nun havas kapaceso por 51,5 mil spektanti. Chefa trofei 1 championkonkurso Germana 1959 5 Germana kupi 1974, 1975, 1981, 1988, 2018 2 UEFA-Kupi 1980, 2022 Extera ligili Eintracht oficala situo Germaniana klubi futbalala
__label__io Salem esas urbo en la stato Massachusetts, Usa. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2019, ol havis habitanti. Lua tota surfaco esas 47,4 km². L'urbo esas famoza pro la judicio en 1692 di mulieri akuzita pri sorcado, qui mortigesis per jibeto. Urbi en Massachusetts
__label__io Zanklewo esas vilajo en provinco Podlakia, distrikto Łomża, vilajala komono Wizna, Polonia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2011, ol havis habitanti. Ol distas cirkume 6 kilometri nord-este de komono-sideyo (Wizna), 22 kilometri nord-este de chefurbo dil distrikto (Łomża), 52 kilometri nord-weste de chefurbo dil provinco (Białystok), e 146 kilometri nord-este de Warszawa. Referi Zanklewo
__label__io Essen esas urbo en Germana stato Nordrheno-Vestfalia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2016, ol havis habitanti. Lua tota surfaco esas 210,32 km². Ol esas importanta industrial urbo an la valo dil rivero Ruhr. Urbi en Nordrheno-Vestfalia
__label__io Niewodnica Nargilewska esas vilajo en provinco Podlakia, distrikto Białystok, vilajala komono Juchnowiec Kościelny, Polonia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2011, ol havis habitanti. Ol distas cirkume 6 kilometri nord-este de komono-sideyo (Juchnowiec Kościelny), 9 kilometri sud-este de chefurbo dil distrikto e samatempe dil provinco (Białystok), e 174 kilometri nord-este de Warszawa. Referi Niewodnica Nargilewska
__label__io Regensburg esas urbo en la Germana stato Bavaria. La urbo jacas an la fluvii Danubio, Regen e Naab. Regensburg esas la chefurbo di la distrikto Supra Palatenio. Segun statistiki de 2018, ol havis habitanti. Lua totala surfaco esas 80,7 km². Historio En la kelta periodo esis urbeto ye la loko di Regensburg qua nomesas Radasbona. La Romani konstruktis ye la yaro 179 fortreso sub la nomo Castra Regina ye la loko di la hodiala urbo. Ye la yaro 1245 Regensburg divenis libera imperiala urbo. Kulturo Hodie Regensburg havas tri alta skoli. Ye la yaro 2019 la muzeo Haus der bayrischen Geschichte (Domo dil Bavariana historio) inauguresis en Regensburg. Sporto La futbalo-klubo SSV Jahn Regensburg ludas en la duesma maxim alta futbalo-ligo di Germania. Urbi en Bavaria Bavaria
__label__io Neologismo esas nova vorto, termo o frazo recente kreita - ofte per aplikar ad nova konceptaji, o per riformar anciena termi en nova lingua formo. Neologismi esas maxim utila inventi, nova fenomeni, od anciena idei qua havas prenita pri nova kulturala kuntexto. Linguistiko Retorikala figuro
__label__io Primorsk esas urbo (de 1967) an rivero Obitichna en estala Ukraina. Ol jacas en provinco Zaporijjia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2019, ol havis habitanti. Entote ol havas 24.99 km² e distas cirkume 695 (per voyi) kilometri este de Kiyiv. Primorsk
__label__io Unco (Uncia uncia o Panthera uncia) esas esas granda felino vivanta precipue en Himalaya e Central Azia, en un regiono kun aproxime 1,2 milioni di km², de sudo di Rusia til Afganistan e Nepal. Ulua pezo povas variar de 27 til 54 kilogrami. Animali havas grosa gambi qua permisas salti til dek metri e longa dika pilo, qua povas variar lua kolori de flavatra bruno til fumoroza grizo. Felini
__label__io Ferdinand de Saussure (1857 til 1913) esis Suisalinguistikisto. En lua Cours de linguistique générale, publikigita en 1916 il explikis note la cienco di signo (semiologio). Suisiana filozofi Linguistikisti
__label__io Louis Lansana Beavogui, politikisto n. ye la 28ma di decembro 1923 til la 19ma di agosto 1984, esis chefa ministro di Guinea de 1972 til 1984. Il ank esis provizore la prezidanto di la lando de marto til aprilo 1984, pos la morto di Ahmed Sékou Touré. Prezidanti di Guinea Chefa ministri di Guinea
__label__io Rolandas Paksas, injenioro e politikistulo n. ye la 10ma di junio 1956, esis prezidanto di Lituania de 2003 til 2004. Il ank esis chefministro di la lando du foyi: en 1999, e de 2000 til 2001. Prezidanti di Lituania Chefministri di Lituania
__label__io Brzozowo-Muzyły esas vilajo en provinco Podlakia, distrikto Białystok, vilajala komono Poświętne, Polonia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2011, ol havis habitanti. Ol distas cirkume 4 kilometri sud-weste de komono-sideyo (Poświętne), 35 kilometri sud-weste de chefurbo dil distrikto e samatempe dil provinco (Białystok), e 141 kilometri nord-este de Warszawa. Referi Brzozowo-Muzyły
__label__io La yaro 1522 (MDXXII per Romala algarismi) esis ordinara yaro komencinta ye merkurdio segun Juliala kalendario. Ol esis la 522ma yaro di la duesma yarmilo, la 22ma yaro di la 16ma yarcento, e la 3ma yaro di la yari 1520a. Eventi Europa 9ma di septembro - Adriaan Florensz divenas papo Adrianus la 6ma. Nur un ek la kin navi komandita da Fernão de Magalhães retronavigas a Hispania. Unesma Lituana-linguala libro publikigesas. Azia Portugalani obtenas areo en Java. Central Amerika 31ma di mayo - Hispani komandita da Andrés Niño desembarkas an l'insulo lore nomizita «Petronila» (nune (Meanguera, en Salvador). Naski (o 1521) - Imperiestro Gelawdewos de Etiopia (m. 1559) Morti Referi Yari 1520a
__label__io Aquobarilo Itaipu esas aquobarilo konstruktita de 1975 til 1982 da Brazilia e Paraguay por furnisar elektro a la du landi. Nune ol havas la maxim granda kapaceso por furnisar elektro en la mondo: 14 GW, kun 20 turbini. La rezervuyo dil aquobarilo kovras km² de Foz do Iguaçu en Brazilia e Ciudad del Este en Paraguay til Guaíra (Brazilia) e Salto del Guairá (Paraguay), 150 km norde de l'aquobarilo. Por konstruktar l'aquobarilo, l'aquofalo di Sete Quedas, en fluvio Paraná, tote desaparis, submersita da la rezervuyo. Por konstruktar la rezervuyo e l'aquobarilo 40,000 laboristi laboris direte. La quanto de betono uzita esus suficanta por konstruktar 210 futbal-stadii equivalanta Maracanã en Rio de Janeiro. La quanto de stalo uzita esus suficanta por konstrukar 380 turmi Eiffel. L'aquobarilo furnisas 90% di l'elektro konsumata en Paraguay e 17% de l'elektro konsumata en Brazilia. Quankam ol recevas duimo di l'energio di Itaipu, Paraguay konsumas poka e vendas la restanta a Brazilia. La binacion firmo Itaipu Binacional responsas pri administrar la produktajo e vendar l'energio produktita en Itaipu a la du landi. Brazilia Paraguay Elektro
__label__io La yaro 88 (LXXXVIII per Romala algarismi) esis bisextila yaro komencinta ye mardio segun Juliala kalendario. Ol esis la 88ma yaro dil unesma yarmilo, la 88ma yaro di la 1ma yarcento, e la 9ma yaro di la 8ma yardeko. Lor ol konocesis kom yaro dil administrado da konsuli Augustus e Rufus o, min ofte, yaro 841 Ab urbe condita. La nomo 88 uzesas por ca yaro de la Mezepoko, kande Anno Domini divenis la precipua formo uzata en Europa por nomar yari. Eventi Romana imperio Du Egiptian obeliski erektesas en Benevento avan templo homajanta deino Isis, honoranta imperiestro Domitianus. Kristanismo Papo Klemens la 1ma sucedas Papo Anakletus la 1ma. Naski Morti 8ma yardeko
__label__io Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, militisto (generalo) (1881 til 1938), esis l'unesma prezidanto di Turkia, e guvernis de 1923 til 1938. Ilu anke esis l'unesma chefministro di lando, de 1920 til 1921. Ilu fondis la moderna Turka Republiko, qua adoptis Latina alfabeto e Gregoriala kalendario. En 1907 il juntis politikala grupo yuna turki qua prenis politika povo de Otoman imperio. En 1911 ilu partoprenis en milito kontre Italia en Libia. Ilu promocesis a kolonelo kande komencis la batalio di Dardanelles. Lua kavaliera konduto nam federiti esis prizita. La nomo Atatürk signifikas, en Turka linguo, patro di Turkiani. Prezidanti di Turkia
__label__io Dubches o Bolshoi Dubches esas Rusiana rivero en Siberia, sinistra enfluanto di Yenisei. Lua fluo esas nur en regiono Krasnoyarsk. La fonto di Dubches 400 kilometri sude di Turuhansk. Ol esas longa de km. Le precipua enfluanti di Dubches esas: Barachnaya, Bolshaya Domota, Bolshaya Natruska, Bolshoi Teulches, Dunches, Gornaya, Hoiba, Kamenistaya, Kamenni Dubches (Teulches), Korotkaya, Malaya Natruska, Mali Teulches, Nikitina, Ozyornaya, Peschanka, Promislovaya, Sakananda (Holemches), Sandakches (Chandashine), Srednyaya Domota, Staraya, Toches (Mokri Toches) e Zaozyornaya. An la rivero esas kolonieto ruraltipa Sandakches. Dubches
__label__io Gulfo di Tailando, anke nomizita gulfo di Siam, esas desprofunda gulfo en la Maro di Sudala Chinia, inter Malaizia, Tailando, Kambodja e Vietnam. Ol havas entote cirkume 320 mil km², kun mezavalora profundeso di 45 metri e maxima profundeso di 80 metri. Fluvio Chao Phraya esas la precipua fluvio qua debushas an la gulfo. Ol formacas granda delto an la nordo di la gulfo, che la metropolala regiono di Bangkok. Kune fluvio Mekong, Chao Phraya transportas granda quanto di sedimenti a la gulfo di Tailando. Pro la poka profundeso di la gulfo, lua aqui esas poke saloza e movas lente. Dum la lasta glacial epoko la gulfo ne existis, e nur esis prolongo di Chao Phraya. Pro la tropikala klimato, li havas granda quanto di koralia rifi. Ol anke havas jaceyi di petrolo e naturala gaso, e la litori di vicina landi esas multe atraktiva por turisti. Mari Geografio di Vietnam
__label__io La krizo dil fuzei en Kuba (Angle: Cuban Missile Crisis; Hispane: Crisis de los misiles en Cuba; Ruse: кубинский ракетный кризис) eventis dum 13 dii en oktobro 1962, ed esis tre serioza konfronto inter Usa e Sovietia dum Kolda milito pri la poziciono di Sovietiana mezodista fuzei en Kuba. La krizo duris dum 13 dii e la konsequi esis diplomacala reformi da Usa e Sovietia. Pos l'invado di la Bayo di Porki en 1961 e pro l'instaluro di balistikala fuzei Usana en Italia e Turkia, Nikita Hruschev decidis aceptar la demando di Kuba ed instalis projektili en l'insulo por impedar futura invado. Historio di Usa Historio di Kuba 20ma yarcento
__label__io La nomizita skandalo di Watergate esis politikala skandalo qua afektis l'administrado Usana de 1972 til 1974, dum la guvernisteso di Richard Nixon. La skandalo komencis kande dokumenti furtesis de la sideyo dil Demokrata Partiso che l'edifico Watergate, en Washington DC ye la 17ma di junio 1972. Ye la sequanta dio, la jurnalo Washington Post mencionis la furto, e dum la sequanta dio, 5 viri arestesis pro la furto. Bob Woodward e Carl Bernstein, jurnalisti de Washington Post, decidis inquestar pri la furto e deskovris konekti inter la 5 viri e la Blanka Domo. Nixon probis celar ta ligili, ma fine ol koaktesis renuncar, kande Usana kongreso decidis akuzar e revokar lu. Historio di Usa
__label__io Nilo Procópio Peçanha (1867 til 1924) advokato e vice-prezidanto di Afonso Pena, qua mortis ye la 14ma di junio 1909 dum lua guvernisteso, esis prezidanto di Brazilia de 1909 til 1910. Lua politikala kariero komencis en 1890, kande lu elektesis membro de la Konstitucala asemblo dil unesma republiko. Prezidanti di Brazilia
__label__io La yaro 573 (DLXXIII per Romala algarismi) esis ordinara yaro komencinta ye sundio segun Juliala kalendario. Ol esis la 573ma yaro del unesma yarmilo, la 73ma yaro de la 6ma yarcento, e la 4ma yaro de la yari 570a. Eventi Europa Papo Ioannes la 3ma koaktesas retretar ek Roma e rezidar che katakombi alonge choseo Appia. Naski Morti Yari 570a
__label__io Hazardo uzesas en ordinara konverso por expresar aparanta manko, se ne kozi, adminime konoco pri kozi. On parolas pri hazardo: kande on ritrovas su en neprevidita situaciono, kande on ne savas to qua iras pasar, kande on ne bon-deziras enirar en kauzesi-detalo. Du necertesi esas ...
__label__io Płonka Kościelna esas vilajo en provinco Podlakia, distrikto Białystok, vilajal-urbala komono Łapy, Polonia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2011, ol havis habitanti. Ol distas cirkume 4 kilometri nord-weste de komono-sideyo (Łapy), 26 kilometri sud-weste de chefurbo dil distrikto e samatempe dil provinco (Białystok), e 150 kilometri nord-este de Warszawa. Referi Płonka Kościelna
__label__io François-André Danican Philidor (1726 til 1795) esis kompozisto e granda championo di shakoludo dum la 18ma yarcento. Segun Philidor la pioni esas l'anmo di shakoludo. Malgre la multa operi quin ilu kompozis, e lua sucesi kom shakoludisto Philidor mortis povra en London. Extera ligilo Shakludi di Philidor che Chessgames Franciana kompozisti Franciana sportisti Shakoludo
__label__io Bergmann-regulo (zoologio) esas principo qua simetresas cirkuma temperaturo kum korpa maso en varma sango animali. Inter mamiferi ed uceli, individui di partikulara speco en kolda klimato esas plu granda ke to en varma arei. Zoologio Empirikaro Termodinamiko
__label__io La batalio di Tarawa esis kombato che l'oceano Pacifiko dum la Duesma mondomilito, qua eventis an l'atolo Tarawa, de la 20ma til la 23ma di novembro 1943. Esis la duesma foyo en ke Usa esis ofensema (la batalio di Guadalcanal esis l'unesma) e l'unesma atakado en la kritika centrala regiono dil Pacifiko. Cirkume 6.400 Japoniani, Koreani ed Usani mortis dum la kombati, la maxim multa an l'insuleto Betio, o proxim ol. Tarawa
__label__io Constantine (Arabe قسنطينة‎ Qusanṭīnah) anke skribata Qacentina, esas la 3ma maxim populoza urbo di Aljeria, dop Aljer ed Oran. Segun la demografiala kontado di 2018, ol havis habitanti. Lua tota surfaco esas 2288 km². Lua nomo homajas Romana imperiestro Konstantinus la 1ma. Urbi en Aljeria
__label__io La yaro 1477 (MCDLXXVII per Romala algarismi) esis ordinara yaro komencinta ye merkurdio segun Juliala kalendario. Ol esis la 477ma yaro di la duesma yarmilo, la 77ma yaro di la 15ma yarcento, e la 8ma yaro di la yari 1470a. Eventi Europa 27ma di februaro - L'universitato di Uppsala fondesas en Suedia. Azia En Japonia, tale nomizita "onin-milito" pri shoguneso finas. Naski 26ma di januaro - Dukino Anna di Bretonia (m. 1514) Morti 5ma di januaro - Charles la Temerara, duko di Burgundia, en kombato proxim Nancy (n. 1433) Yari 1470a
__label__io Hans-Adam la 2ma (n. Johannes Adam Ferdinand Alois Josef Maria Marko d'Aviano Pius von und zu Liechtenstein ye la 14ma di februaro 1945) esas la nuna princo di Liechtenstein. Monarki di Liechtenstein
__label__io Elektrogorsk (Ruse: Электрогорск) esas urbo che la provinco Moskva, en Rusia. Segun statistiki de 2017, ol havis habitanti. Lua totala surfaco esas 39 km². Ol fondesis en 1912 e divenis urbo en 1946. Che l'urbo esas ferovoyala staciono. Urbi en Rusia
__label__io Distrikto Dno esas un ek la distrikti di provinco Pskov en Rusia. Olua administrala centro esas Dno. Urbi e kolonieti urbaltipa En la distrikto situesas un urbo – administrala centro Dno. Komoni dil distrikto Segun datumi de 2023 la distrikto subdividesas en 3 komoni, qui administrala centri situesas en: Dno, Viskod e Iskra. Referi Distrikto Dno
__label__io Doktrino e Konvencioni esas kanonala skribajo di Eklezio di Iesu Kristo di Lasta-Dia Santi. Ol skribesis da Joseph Smith, Jr. Historio Ol kontenas multa informo pri l'organizado e guvernerio di Eklezio di Iesu Kristo di Lasta-Dia Santi ed altra informi. Konvencioni La seciono korespondanta al konvencioni titulas "Konvencioni e Komandi dil Sioro por la Serfi di Eklezio dil Lasta-Dia Santi", li havis entote 103 secioni konsiderita kom reveladi pri l'organizado dil eklezio. Ita 103 reveladi kontenas principi por la guvernerio dil eklezio, prenita dil reveladi donacita depos l'organizo dil Eklezio en 1830. Singla ek la 103 reveladi asignesis a unika seciono, ecepte la seciono 66 qua uzesis du foyi en l'unesma editado di Doktrino e Konvencioni. Texti di Lasta-Dia Santi
__label__io Kenneth Ronald "Ken" Berry (3ma di novembro 1933 til la 1ma di decembro 2018) esis Usana televizion-aktoro, komediisto e dansito. Ilu partoprenis televiziono-serii F Troop, The Andy Griffith Show, Mayberry R.F.D e Mama's Family. Il anke aparis en kelka cinematografuri e teatraji. Usan aktori dil 20ma yarcento Usana komediisti Usana dansisti
__label__io Alice Neel (n. ye la 28ma di januaro 1900 til la 13ma di oktobro 1984) esis Usana piktisto. El esas multe konocata pro elua portreti pri amiki, familiani, amoranti, poeti, artisti e stranjeri, en qua el uzis tekniki expresionista. Usana piktisti
__label__io Sergei Yevgenyevich Berezin (n. ye la 5ma di novembro 1971) esas Rusiana ex-hokeisto sur glacio. Kariero Stankostroitel Ryazan (1989-1990) / Himik Voskresensk (1990-1994) Vyatich Ryazan (1991) Kölner Haie (1994-1996) Toronto Maple Leafs (1996-2001) Phoenix Coyotes (2001-2002) Montreal Canadiens (2002) Chicago Blackhawks (2002-2003) Washington Capitals (2003) CSKA Moskva (2003) Berezin esis konkurencanto en Mondala Championesi (1994, 1995, 1996, 1998), Olimpiala Ludi (1994) e Mondala Kupo (1996). Sukcesi En esquado di Rusia: Arjenta medalio dum Mondala Championeso U-20: 1991 Klubala: Ora medalio en Championeso di Germania: 1995 (Kölner Haie) Arjenta medalio en Championeso di Germania: 1996 (Kölner Haie) 2ma loko en Europana Kupo: 1996 (Kölner Haie) Personala: Maxim bona ludisto di sezono (ligo DEL 1994/1995) Maxim efikanta ludisto (fazo play-off) (17 goli – ligo DEL 1994/1995) Maxim efikanta ludisto (7 goli – Mondala Championeso 1995) Maxim efikanta ludisto (bazala sezono) (50 goli – ligo DEL 1995/1996) Maxim efikanta ludisto (fazo play-off) (13 goli – ligo DEL 1995/1996) Maxim bona ludisto di sezono (ligo DEL 1995/1996) Rusiana hokeisti
__label__io Muroran (室蘭市, むろらんし) esas urbo industriala ed importanta portuo en Hokkaido, Japonia. Segun la demografiala kontado di 2020, ol havis habitanti. Lua tota surfaco esas 80,88 km². Lua nomo venas de Ainu vorto "Mo Ruerani", signifikanta "fundo di mikra taluso". Urbi en Hokkaido
__label__io La yaro 1035 (MXXXV per Romala algarismi) esis ordinara yaro komencinta ye merkurdio segun Juliala kalendario. Ol esis la 35ma yaro de la duesma yarmilo, la 35ma yaro de la 11ma yarcento, e la 6ma yaro de la yari 1030a. Eventi Europa Hardeknud divenas rejo di Dania, pos la morto di Knut la Granda. Naski Morti 12ma di novembro - Knut la Granda, rejo di Anglia, Norvegia e Dania (n. c. 995) Yari 1030a
__label__io Fairmont esas la nomo di kelka loki en Usa: Fairmont, Minnesota Fairmont, Nordal Karolina Fairmont, Westal Virginia En Kanada, on trovas Fairmont Hot Springs, British Columbia Fairmont Hotels and Resorts
__label__io Sosnowik esas vilajo en provinco Podlakia, distrikto Sokółka, komono Szudziałowo, Polonia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2011, ol havis habitanti. Ol distas cirkume 8 kilometri sud-weste de komono-sideyo (Szudziałowo), 21 kilometri sud-este de chefurbo dil distrikto (Sokółka), 33 kilometri nord-este de chefurbo dil provinco (Białystok), e 208 kilometri nord-este de Warszawa. Referi Sosnowik
__label__io Dobrowoda esas vilajo en provinco Podlakia, distrikto Białystok, vilajala komono Turośń Kościelna, Polonia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2011, ol havis habitanti. Ol distas cirkume 5 kilometri nord-weste de komono-sideyo (Turośń Kościelna), 15 kilometri sud-weste de chefurbo dil distrikto e samatempe dil provinco (Białystok), e 161 kilometri nord-este de Warszawa. Referi Dobrowoda
__label__io Zielianskoye (ank Babinavickaye) esas lago en estala Bielorusia, provinco Viciebsk, distrikto Liozna. Lo situesis proxim agrourbeto Babinavichi. Hike havas sua fonto rivero Luchosa (sinistra enfluanto di Daugava), e enfluas ad lo Viarhita. Referi Zielianskoye
__label__io Sasiny esas vilajo en provinco Podlakia, distrikto Bielsk Podlaski, komono Wyszki, Polonia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2011, ol havis habitanti. Ol distas cirkume 2 kilometri sud-este de komono-sideyo (Wyszki), 15 kilometri nord-weste de chefurbo dil distrikto (Bielsk Podlaski), 35 kilometri sud-weste de chefurbo dil provinco (Białystok), e 150 kilometri nord-este de Warszawa. Referi Sasiny
__label__io Katana esas tipo di longa kurva un-bizela espado Japoniana uzita da le samurai. Olua lamo esas normale plu longa kam 60 cm. Nun kelka homi ankore kolektas od uzas katana, quale por sporto, ed ula forjisti anke ankore produktas li. Katana facesas segun tradiciono de specala stalo nomata tamahagane en la Japoniana, ofte kombinante diversa strati di stalo en la lamo. Espadi
__label__io Larry Martin Hagman (n. ye la 21ma di septembro 1931 til la 23ma di novembro 2012) esis Usana cinem- e televizion-aktoro. Ilu notoreskis pro lua roli kom l'astronauto Anthony Nelson che la televiziono-komedio I Dream of Jeannie, e kom la richa e senkompata petrolo-barono J.R. Ewing che la televiziono-serio Dallas. Usan aktori dil 20ma yarcento Usan aktori dil 21ma yarcento
__label__io Rawicz esas vilajo en provinco Łódź, distrikto Bełchatów, komono Drużbice, Polonia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2011, ol havis habitanti (49,2% esis mulieri). Ol distas cirkume 35 kilometri sud-weste de Łódź e 140 kilometri sud-weste de Warszawa. Rawicz
__label__io Randolph Denard Ornette Coleman, n. ye la 9ma di marto 1930 til la 11ma di junio 2015, esis Usana trumpetisto, saxofonisto, violinisto e kompozisto di jazo, stili bebop, blues e free jazz. Ilu inventis tale nomizita stilo free jazz, en lua albumo Free Jazz: A Collective Improvisation lansita en 1960. Referi Usana muzikisti Usana kompozisti
__label__io Mathieu Valbuena (n. ye la 28ma di septembro 1984) esas Franca futbalisto. Ilu komencis ilua kariero en 2004 che futbalo-klubo F. C. Libourne-Saint-Seurin, e nun ludas por Olimpiakos F. C. de Grekia e por la nacionala futbalo-esquado di Francia. Franciana futbalisti
__label__io Gipso esas kali-sulfato, maxim-multa-kaze hidratoza. simbolo kemiala SO4 Ca 2H2 O. ta materio, kalcinite e pulverigite, uzata por masono : on humidigas lu por igar lu pasta, e kande risika, lu ri-esas tam harda kam ante kalcineso. Kalcio minerali Sedimentala roki
__label__io Karl Hjalmar Branting (23ma di novembro 1860 – 24ma di februaro 1925) esis Sueda politikisto. Il esis chefministro di Suedia tri foyi: en 1920, de 1921 til 1923, e de 1924 til 1925. En 1921 il ganis la Nobel-premio pri paco. Chefministri di Suedia
__label__io Gladiatoro esas (en la Roma antiqua) viro quan onu igis kombatar, en cirko, kontre altra viri o kontre bestii feroca, por amuzar la plebeyi spektanta. Gladiatoro esas profesionala kombatisto (maxim ofte sklavo o kondamnito) qua luktis koram la Romana publiko por morto o vivo. Dum enirar l'areno (ex-e., ta di la Koloseo) li salutis l’imperiestro per la vorti ‘Ave Caesar, morituri te salutant’ (Saluto Imperiestro, ta qua mortos salutas vu). Sporti romana imperio
__label__io Lu Xun esis la pseudonimo di Zhou Shuren (1881 til 1936), Chiniana skriptisto ed esayisto judikata kom un ek la fondinti di la moderna Chiniana literaturo, ed un ek la maxim importanta skriptisti Chiniana de la 20ma yarcento. Naskinta en Shaoxing, ilu recevis la nomo Zhou Zhangshou, pos Zhou Yucai e fine Zhou Shùrén, qua signifikas "edukita homo". La morto di lua patro, posible pro tuberkloso, stimulis ilu studiar medicino. Ilu recevis la diplomo pri medicino en 1904 en Sendai, Japonia. En 1918 il uzis unesmafoye la pseudonimo Lu Xun, por skriptar Kuangren Riji ("Diario di un dementulo"). Il esis un ek l'unesma suporteri di Esperanto en Chinia. Chiniana skriptisti Esperanto
__label__io Provinco Novosibirsk esas un ek la subdividuri di Rusia. Ol subdividesas en 30 distrikti (5 urbala), ed olua chefurbo esas Novosibirsk. Precipua loki De loki en la provinco super 8 000 habitanti esas: Distrikti De 35 distrikti esas 5 l'urbi kom legitima (urbala) distrikti: Berdsk, Iskitim, Koltsovo, Ob e Novosibirsk. La cetera 30 distrikti esas: Bagan, Barabinsk, Bolotnoye, Vengerovo, Dovolnoye, Zdvinsk, Iskitim, Karasuk, Kargat, Kolivan, Kochenyovo, Kochki, Krasnozyorskoye, Kuibishev, Kupino, Kishtovka, Maslyanino, Moshkovo, Novosibirsk, Ordinskoye, Severnoye, Suzun, Tatarsk, Toguchin, Ubinskoye, Ust-Tarka, Chani, Cherepanovo, Chistoozyornoye e Chulim. Referi Provinco Novosibirsk
__label__io Sabine Katharina Lisicki (n. ye la 22ma di septembro 1989) esas Germaniana tenisistino. Segun datumi di WTA por 6ma di marto 2023 Sabine Lisicki es 301ma tenisistino dil mondo. Referi Germaniana tenisisti
__label__io Septenara nombrosistemo o septenara nombrifado (ank sepala) es pozicionala nombrosistemo, en qua bazo dil sistemo es nombro '7', e por skribar nombri en la sistemo uzesas sep cifri: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Nombrifado
__label__io Doneck esas urbo en Ukraina. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2016, ol havis habitanti. Lua tota surfaco esas 358 km². L'extraktado di karbono esas importanta por l'ekonomio dil urbo. L'urbo apartenas depos la fino di la Sovietia a Ukraina, ma ye la yaro 2014 violentoza separisti qui subtenesis de Rusia konquestis la povo en la urbo. Li deklaris la internacione ne agnoskita pseudo-stato Popul-Republiko Doneck (Doneck esas la chefurbo di ol). Urbi en Ukraina Doneck
__label__io La yaro 1322 (MCCCXXII per Romala algarismi) esis ordinara yaro komencinta ye venerdio segun Juliala kalendario. Ol esis la 322ma yaro di la duesma yarmilo, la 22ma yaro di la 14ma yarcento, e la 3ma yaro di la yari 1320a. Eventi 24ma di junio - Judi triesmafoye ekpulsesas de Francia. Naski Morti 3ma di januaro - Rejulo Philippe la 5ma di Francia (n. 1293) Yari 1320a
__label__io Jacques Bernoulli o Jakob (1654 til 1705) esis matematikisto, seniora fratulo di Jean, onklulo di Daniel. Il renkontris Robert Boyle e Robert Hooke dum voyajo ad Anglia en 1676, pos qua il selektis matematiko, e divenas profesoro en 1687. Il korespondis kun Gottfried Leibniz, e do infinitezima kalkulo, e kunlaboris kun lua fratulo Jean. Lua precipua verko esas Ars Conjectandi. La kratero Bernoulli en Luno, nomizesis memoriganta Jacques e lia frato Jean. Suisiana matematikisti
__label__io Arzamas (en Rusiana linguo Арзамас) esas urbo en provinco Nijni Novgorod, Rusia. L'OKATA-kodexo dil urbo (ye 2005) esas 22403. Fondesis en 1578. Ol divenis urbo en 1719. La interurbala telefona kodexo esas 83147, la enurbala telefonnumeri havas kin cifri (en 2005). La tempo esas la sama kam la tempo en Moskva (ye 2005). Geografiala koordinati dil urbo esas: latitudo 55°24' norde, longitudo 43°49' este. L'urbo jacas alonge la rivero Tyosha (Тёша). En l'urbo esas fervoyo staciono. En 1959 l'urbo havis 41.5 mil habitanti. En 2002 l'urbo havis 109.4 mil habitanti. Referi Arzamas Arzamas
__label__io Tsaghkadzor esas urbo en Armenia. Segun la demografiala kontado di 2011, ol havis habitanti. Lua tota surfaco esas 4 km². Ol distas cirkume 56 km norde de Yerevan, ed esas famoza pro lua skio-staciono, multe uzata dum vintri. Referi Urbi en Armenia
__label__io Personal uniono esas uniono di du o plu stati havanta ca sama suvereno, ma kun posedo daci stati di autonomeso pri lego, politiko, e kelkafoye ank konstituco. Kelk exempli di personal unioni Kalmar-uniono (1397-1537) Dania-Norvegia (1524-1814) Polonia-Lituania sub Henri la 3ma di Francia (1574–1575) Kongresala Polonia (1815-1832) Historio
__label__io Pawły esas vilajo en provinco Podlakia, distrikto Białystok, vilajal-urbala komono Zabłudów, Polonia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2011, ol havis habitanti. Ol distas cirkume 9 kilometri sud-weste de komono-sideyo (Zabłudów), 25 kilometri sud-este de chefurbo dil distrikto e samatempe dil provinco (Białystok), e 174 kilometri nord-este de Warszawa. Referi Pawły
__label__io La yaro 91 (XCI per Romala algarismi) esis ordinara yaro komencinta ye saturdio segun Juliala kalendario. Ol esis la 91ma yaro dil unesma yarmilo, la 91ma yaro di la 1ma yarcento, e la 2ma yaro di la 9ma yardeko. Lor ol konocesis kom yaro dil administrado da konsuli Glabrio e Traianus o, min ofte, yaro 844 Ab urbe condita, to esas, 844 yari depos la fondo di Roma.La nomo 90 uzesas por ca yaro de la Mezepoko, kande Anno Domini divenis la precipua formo por nomar yari. Eventi Naski Morti 9ma yardeko
__label__io Surveyor 2 esis Usana kosmoproblio, la duesma di la Surveyor-projeto. La skopo di ca projeto esis demonstrar la praktikebleso di dolce atingar la surfaco di la luno; esis sep kosmosondili en la serii, qui lansesis de 1966 til 1968, di qui kin esis sucesoza. Surveyor 1 atingis la surfaco en junio 1966 e fotografis la tereno. Surveyor 2 lansesis ye 20 di septembro 1966. La projetita misiono esis arivar ye altra regiono di la luno kam Surveyor 1, e prenar fotografuri. Tamen, esis falio di korektigo di la voyo dum la voyajo, e la sondilo kolizionis kun la luno proxim kratero Copernicus, ye rapideso 2,6 km/s, ye 23 di septembro. Kosmoprobili
__label__io Sokolany esas vilajo en provinco Podlakia, distrikto Sokółka, komono Sokółka, Polonia. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2011, ol havis habitanti. Ol distas cirkume 7 kilometri nord-weste de komono-sideyo e chefurbo dil distrikto (Sokółka), 43 kilometri nord-este de chefurbo dil provinco (Białystok), e 215 kilometri nord-este de Warszawa. Referi Sokolany
__label__io Ohio esas rivero Usa longa de 1579 km, qua naskas an Pensilvania, en la loko ube la riveri Allegheny e Monongahela unionas su, 220 metri super la marala nivelo, trairas 6 Usana stati e debushas an la fluvio Mississippi, che l'urbo Cairo, Illinois, an altitudo di 88 metri super la marala nivelo. Nord-Amerikana fluvii e riveri Geografio di Usa
__label__io Balotnica esas vilajo en estala Bielorusia, provinco Viciebsk, distrikto Haradok, komono Yeziarishcha. La loko jacas 3 kilometri de sinistra rivo di rivero Lovat e westala rivo di lago Sennica en baseno di Neva, 3 km de frontiero Bielorusia – Rusia, 20 km sud-este de administrala centro dil komono (Yeziarishcha) e 42 kilometri de Haradok. Lo situesas ank cirkum 20 km de ferovojala staciono Hribachi. Dum duesma mondomilito la loko okupesis da nazisti Germaniana de la julio 1941 til junio 1944. Til 2018 la vilajo apartenis ad exkomono Rudnia. Referi Balotnica Balotnica
__label__io Vladislav Valeryevich Milnikov (n. ye la 12ma di septembro 2000) esas Rusiana skermistulo (pri flereto), ganisto dil arjentea medalio dum Olimpiala Ludi en Tokyo (2020). Rusiana skermisti Rusiana medaliisti olimpiala Kursk
__label__io Seine esas fluvio an la nordo di Francia. Olua longeso esas cirkume 776 km; olua origino esas 30 km nord-weste de Dijon en estal Francia. Ol esas navigebla per oceano-navi til Rouen, 120 km de la maro; ol esas utiligata per komercala fluvio-bateli til Burgundia. Fluvii di Francia Fluvio Seine
__label__io La prezidanto esas la chefo di stato e la chefo di guvernerio di Palau. Lu elektesas direte dal populo por 4-yara periodo. Yen listo pri prezidanti di Palau, de 1981 til nun. Omna prezidanti esas nedependanta politikisti. Referi
__label__io La yaro 2027 (MMXXVII per Romala algarismi) esos yaro komenconta ye venerdio segun gregoriala kalendario. Ol esos la 27ma yaro de la 3ma yarmilo, la 27ma yaro de la 21ma yarcento e la 8ma yaro de la yari 2020a. Eventi Naski Morti Nobel-premiiziti Fiziko: [[ Kemio: [[ Fiziologio o Medicino: [[ Literaturo: [[ Paco: [[ Ekonomiko: [[ Yari 2020a
__label__io Champiniono esas genero di fungi di la familio "agaricinei", karakterizata de la prezenteso di ringo ye la supro di la pedo, lami libera rozea, pose nigra, c.e., departanta de la bordo di la chapelo e qui ne arivas til la pedo, e spori bruna purpurea. Fungi
__label__io Nanga Parbat (Diamir) esas la 9ma maxim alta monto (8 126 m) en Tero. Ol esas en nordo di Pakistan, en Himalaya. Ol esas konocita kom Asasinanta Monto pro desfacilesa e danjeroza kondicioni di acenso. Monti Pakistan
__label__io Boeing 757 esas komercal jet-aviono bimotora fabrikita da Boeing de 1981 til 2004 por remplasar la Boeing 727 en kurta e mezagranda itinerarii. Boeing 757 povas transportar de 200 til 289 personi. Referi Komercala avioni
__label__io Stefanos Skuludis (n. ye la 23ma di novembro 1836 til la 20ma di agosto 1928) esis chefministro di Grekia, e guvernis la lando de la 7ma di novembro 1915 til la 21ma di junio 1916. Chefministri di Grekia
__label__io O esas la 15ma litero en la bazala latina alfabeto ed en la bazala alfabeto ISO. En multa alfabeti, ol povas skribesar kun diakritiki: Ø ø Ǿ ǿ ᶱ[4] Ö ö Ȫ ȫ Ó ó Ò ò Ô ô Ố ố Ồ ồ Ổ ổ Ỗ ỗ Ộ ộ Ǒ ǒ Ő ő Ŏ ŏ Ȏ ȏ Ȯ ȯ Ȱ ȱ Ọ ọ Ɵ ɵ Ơ ơ Ớ ớ Ờ ờ Ỡ ỡ Ợ ợ Ở ở Ỏ ỏ Ō ō Ṓ ṓ Ṑ ṑ Õ õ Ȭ ȭ Ṍ ṍ Ṏ ṏ Ǫ ǫ Ȍ ȍ O̩ o̩ Ó̩ ó̩ Ò̩ ò̩ Ǭ ǭ Historio La litero olim esis imajo di okulo. Altra formi por reprezentar O bazala latina alfabeto
__label__io Petergof (ad 1944 – Petergof; 1944-1997 – Petrodvorec) esas urbo an Gulfo di Finlando en westal Rusia, kom parto di urbo-subdividuro Sankt-Peterburg. Segun statistiki dil yaro 2022, ol havis habitanti. Ol distas cirkume 645 kilometri sud-este de Moskva. En Pushkin trovas palaco Peterhof. Referi Petergof
__label__io Mohammad Hidayatullah (n. ye la 17ma di decembro 1905 til la 18ma di septembro 1992) esis provizora prezidanto di India, e guvernis la lando de la 20ma di julio 1969 til la 24ma di agosto 1969. Prezidanti di India
__label__io James Dewar (1842 til 1923) esis Skotiana fizikisto e kemiisto. Il esas konocata pro ilua laboro pri la liquidigo di gasi, ed exploradi ye temperaturi proxim absoluta zero. Il desegnis e konstruktis mashino qua produktis liquida oxigeno. Il inventis vakuo-cirkondita kontenilo por konservar liquidigita gasi; il ne patentizis ca inventuro, olqua plu tarde divenis generale konocata kom la vakuo-flakono o Thermos-flakono. Britaniana fizikisti Britaniana kemiisti
__label__io Viera Valieriewna Lapko (n. ye la 29ma di septembro 1998) esas Bielorusiana tenisistino. Segun datumi di WTA por 6ma di marto 2023 Viera Lapko es 324ma tenisistino dil mondo. Referi Bielorusiana tenisisti
__label__io Eris (simbolo: ; antee konocita kom 2003 UB313) esas objekto en nia sunala sistemo, recente deskovrita e plu granda kam Plutono. Eris havas un satelito qua nomesas Dysnomia. Pro la deskovro di Eris la stando di Plutono divenis ne-certa, e pose Plutono divenis nano-planeto, kun altri quale Ceres. Lua diametro esas aproxime km. Referi Sunala sistemo
__label__io Sub-komono Maei esas un de du sub-komoni en distrikto Thandwe, komono Toungup, stato Rakhine, Myanmar. Administreyo dica sub-regiono esas Toungup. Segun statistiki de 29ma di marto 2014, la regioneto havis 43904 habitanti (mulieri – 50,8 %). Maei
__label__io Ne timez. Vu darfas fidar a me.
__label__io Me ne parolas la Japoniana linguo.
__label__io Me pensas ke olu esas tro granda.
__label__io Portez a me toalo balnita.
__label__io Ico esas desfacila.
__label__io Mea familionomo esas Jones.
__label__io Me trovis ke klozar la pordo esis desfacila.
__label__io Me konkordas pri ta afero.
__label__io Lu ne semblas esar saja, ka vera?
__label__io Quale esas la vino e quale esas la biro?
__label__io Quanta membrin havas la kruo di ca navo?
__label__io Ka vu iros al merkato kun Juma?"No, me iros sole.
__label__io Ni komencez per ica problemo.
__label__io Me finis lektar la libro lasta-nokte.
__label__io Il iras a la biblioteko por lektar libri.
__label__io Me eniras la butiko.
__label__io Ka tu ne esas felica?
__label__io Mea fratulo Jacques evas dek-e-quar yari.
__label__io Me prizas ta taso.
__label__io Ka vu avertos me kande ilu venos?
__label__io La vorti expresas pensi.
__label__io Lu esas viro habila.
__label__io Lu esas tro inteligenta por agar ulo tale stupida.
__label__io Ilu klozis la pordo.
__label__io Quo separas Guangdong de Guangxi?
__label__io Tom ne kuras tam rapide kam Bill.
__label__io Me iras balnar.
__label__io Hastez por ke vu povus abordar la treno.
__label__io Ilu ne havas irga parenti.
__label__io Klabaster e Gizmo esas kati.
__label__io Ica hundi esas granda.
__label__io Lu salvis l'infanto kuste di sua vivo.
__label__io Me esis serchanta vi.
__label__io Me prizas voyajar per treno.
__label__io Esas preske dek-e-un kloki e duimo.
__label__io Ilu ne havas amiko.
__label__io Me devas reparigar mea komputero.
__label__io Pos kelka tempo lu deskovris la respondo.
__label__io Ta ligno ne brulas.
__label__io Bona jorno, Sioro Saari.
__label__io Ica cizo ne tranchas.
__label__io Me havas revuo en mea chambro.
__label__io Ne utilesas pensar pluse.
__label__io Me ne savas.
__label__io Lu komencis la leciono per anekdoto humuroza.
__label__io Me volas kisar tu.
__label__io Me amas mea genitori.
__label__io Ne parolez ad il talmaniere.
__label__io Mea docisto rekomendis a me lektar Shakespeare.
__label__io Voluntez klozar la pordo.
__label__io Me ne savas qua kloko esas.
__label__io Bona jorno ad omni.
__label__io Me bezonas laboro.
__label__io Il iris a London tra Paris.
__label__io Li venis demandar la paco.
__label__io Me projetas irar a Kobe nexta semane.
__label__io Sur la tablo esas libro.
__label__io Voluntez respondar ad omna questioni.
__label__io Me esas sempre pronta helpar tu.
__label__io Ti qui esas mortonta salutas vi.
__label__io Cesez vidar me kom "normala" persono.
__label__io Atomal energio utilizesus por pacoza skopi.
__label__io Me hungras!
__label__io Me manjis ol pro ke me hungris.
__label__io Li devus ne parolar hike.
__label__io Me vere amas mea plumo blua.
__label__io Me tre desquietesas.
__label__io Lua patro esas japoniano.
__label__io Me hungras pro ke me ne dejunetis.
__label__io Me iras laborar.
__label__io Li harde laboris jorne e nokte.
__label__io Me lernis vivar sen el.
__label__io El esas tre saja.
__label__io Me demandis de Tom apertar la fenestro.
__label__io Il arivis ye noktomezo.
__label__io La taso esas sur la tablo.
__label__io Me havas amiko qua vivas en London.
__label__io Hiere me vidis mea amiki
__label__io Il esas exter l'oficeyo.
__label__io La kati odias l'aquo.
__label__io Omna pomi qui falas manjesas dal porki.
__label__io Me esperas ke tu retrovenos.
__label__io Ta esas precize la libro quan me volis lektar.
__label__io Li decidis klozar la fabrikerio.
__label__io Nulu komprenas me.
__label__io Ol esis charmanta vespero autunal.
__label__io Me nur volis lektar mea elektronik-postala mesaji.
__label__io Me komprenas nun.
__label__io La rejulo nihiligis sua enemiki.
__label__io El esas multe plu alta kam me.
__label__io La suno esas plu granda kam la luno.
__label__io Me vizitos sioro Brown morge.
__label__io Me iros al merkato pos-dimeze. Ka vu? "No, me ne iros."
__label__io Dum ke nia patro esis exter-lande, il inter-kontaktis kun ni per letro e telefono.
__label__io Se vu deziras vivar longatempe, cesez fumar sigareti.
__label__io Ka Juma iros al merkato kun Hasani? "No, il iros sole."
__label__ie Saelices de la Sal es un municipie situat in li provincia de Guadalajara, in li comunité autonom de Castilia-La Mancha, Hispania. It have un population de inhabitantes. Municipies del provincia de Guadalajara
__label__ie Poseidon es in li Grec mitologie li deo del mare. Il es un fratre de Zeus e un del 12 olimpic deitás. Poseidon es sovent portretat con un trident in su manu vehiculant un carre de guerre. Secun li grec mitologie Poseidon esset maritat con Amphitrite e li cuple havet li filio Triton, li cavalle Areion e li filias Rhode e Benthesikyme. In li Roman Imperie Poseidon esset conosset quam Neptun. Grec mitologie
__label__ie Li Television (anc brevi: TV; del grec τῆλε(tèle)= distant e del latin visio= vision) es un telecomunication medium de se movent fotos in nigri-blanc o in colores e in du o tri dimensiones. Historie Un del unésimes mecanic televisiores esset li Nipkow disco, quel esset patentar in 1884 In 1928 li Baird Television Development Company/Cinema Television transmisset quam li unési un transatlantice-signale. In 1934 in Berlin Manfred von Ardenne presentat li unésim tot electric television In 1953 li Eurovision, li europan organisation por television, ha esset instituet In 1956 Ampex presentat li unésim video-recorder In 1982 Sony presenat li unésim Camcorder In 1995 aparit li unésim DVD In 2010 aparit li unésim tri dimesiones capabil televisiores Societá
__label__ie Alcubillas es un municipie situat in li provincia de Ciudad Real, in li comunité autonom de Castilia-La Mancha, Hispania. It have un population de inhabitantes. Municipies del provincia de Ciudad Real
__label__ie Villalobón es un municipie situat in li provincia de Palencia, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Palencia
__label__ie Puras es un municipie situat in li provincia de Valladolid, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Valladolid
__label__ie Vertavillo es un municipie situat in li provincia de Palencia, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Palencia
__label__ie Li Stadion Kyocera es un sport-arena in li cité Den Haag in Nederland. It have spacie por 15.000 spectatores. Li Stadion Kyocera es li hem del local football-club ADO Den Haag, quel li max alt football-liga de Nederland li Ehrendivision. Til 2010 li stadion portat li nómine ADO Den Haag Stadion o anc nóminat Zuiderpark. Li arena esset constructet inter 2005 e 2007. It esset oficialmen apertet in li 28-im de julí 2007 per un football-match. Li fassade del stadion consiste ex brilliant aluminium. Li construction custat 28 million euro. Li Stadion Kyocera es anc usat por hockey sur terre. In li annu 2014 eveni li championatus mundel in li hockey sur terre por mannes e féminas in li Stadion Kyocera. Sport Nederland
__label__ie Februar -- Marte -- April 1 -- 2 -- 3 -- 4 -- 5 -- 6 -- 7 -- 8 -- 9 -- 10 -- 11 -- 12 -- 13 -- 14 -- 15 -- 16 -- 17 -- 18 -- 19 -- 20 -- 21 -- 22 -- 23 -- 24 -- 25 -- 26 -- 27 -- 28 -- 29 -- 30 -- 31 9 marte es li 68-im die del annu in li calendare gregorian (li 69-im die in annus bissextil). Resta 297 dies til li fine del annu. Evenimentes 1701 - Truppes savafid fugi de Basra, dante fin a tri annus de ocupation. Nascenties Mortes Marte
__label__ie Un operativ systema (OS) es li systema de programmas, queles provide li essential functiones por li operation de un computator. Generalmen, un operativ systema refere a pluri different types de programmas, queles functiona simultanmen. Generalmen, operativ systemas have li secuent partes: Un nucleo, quel provide li basic administratori functiones del memorie e del processus. Un interfacie inter apparates e programmas, por que un singul programma posse functionar in computatores con pluri types de hardware. Un bibliotheca de standard modules por general e frequent operationes. Un usatori interfacie, quel provide li basic structuras de interaction ínter li operativ systema e li usator. Fontes Ti-ci articul contene materiale de Wikipedia in Interlingua. Informatica
__label__ie Maryland es un del 50 states federativ del Unit States de America. It es situat in li nord-ost del USA. Li cité capital de Maryland es Annapolis, ma li max grand cité de Maryland es Baltimore. Maryland have 5,615 million habitantes. In li annu 1788 Maryland devenit li 7-im state federativ del USA. Guvernator: Martin O'Mally (Democratic Partise) States del Unit States de America
__label__ie Šiprage es un cité de Bosnia e Herzegovina. Tra li cité flue li fluvie Vrbanja. It es situat in li Republika Srpska. Li cité have 788 habitantes (2013). Šiprage es situat in li Dinarian Montania e circumeat de montes. Li fonte del fluvie Vrbanja es in li proximitá de Šiprage. Reference Internet Website de cité http://www.maplandia.com/bosnia-and-herzegovina/republika-srpska/siprage/ Maplandia http://www.satellitecitymaps.com/europe-map/bosnia-and-herzegovina-map/federation-of-bosnia-and-herzegovina-map/%C5%A1iprage-map/ http://www.distancesfrom.com/distance-from-Siprage-to-Banja-Luka-Bosna-i-Hercegovina/DistanceHistory/5243320.aspx http://www.maplandia.com/bosnia-and-herzegovina/republika-srpska/siprage/ Maplandia http://www.satellitecitymaps.com/europe-map/bosnia-and-herzegovina-map/federation-of-bosnia-and-herzegovina-map/%C5%A1iprage-map/ http://www.distancesfrom.com/distance-from-Siprage-to-Banja-Luka-Bosna-i-Hercegovina/DistanceHistory/5243320.aspx http://www.udaljenosti.com/bosna/- Distances in B&H Cités de Bosnia e Herzegovina
__label__ie Li Subdistrict Leer es un subdistrict in Infra Saxonia. It es situat in li nord-west de Infra Saxoniae in li nord-west de Germania. Li Subdistrict have 168.946 habitantes e un area de 1.086,01 quadrat-kilometres. Infra Saxonia
__label__ie Li Rhein-Lahn-Kreis es un subdistrict in Rheinland-Palatinia. It es situat in li nord de Rheinland-Palatinia e in li west de Germania. Li Subdistrict have 122.381 habitantes e un area de 782,29 quadrat-kilometres. Rheinland-Palatinia
__label__ie Hontoria de Valdearados (Burgos) es un village situat in li provincia de Burgos, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de inhabitantes. Municipies del provincia de Burgos
__label__ie Faraján es un municipie situat in li provincia de Málaga, in li comunité autonom de Andalusia, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Málaga
__label__ie Donvidas es un municipie situat in li provincia de Avila, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Avila
__label__ie 1 -- 2 -- 3 -- 4 -- 5 -- 6 -- 7 -- 8 -- 9 -- 10 -- 11 -- 12 -- 13 -- 14 -- 15 -- 16 -- 17 -- 18 -- 19 -- 20 -- 21 -- 22 -- 23 -- 24 -- 25 -- 26 -- 27 -- 28 -- 29 -- 30 30 novembre es li 334-im die del annu in li calendare gregorian (li 335-im die in annus bissextil). Resta 31 dies til li fine del annu. Evenimentes 1939 - Guerre Hivernal: forties sovietic transea li frontiera finnlandés in pluri locs e bomba Helsinki e quelc altri cités, talmen comensante li guerre. Nascenties Mortes Novembre
__label__ie Chengdu (chinesi: 成都) es un cité in China in li sud-west del land. It es li cité capital del Provincia Sichuan. Li cité have 15.709.700 (2010) habitantes e un area de 12.346 quadrat-kilometres. Chengdu es un important economic e cultural centre in li west de China. China Cités de China
__label__ie Gitanas Nausėda es un economist e politico de Lituania. Il nascet li 19-im de may 1964 in Klaipėda e es desde li 12-im de julí 2019 presidente de Lituania. Gitanas Nausėda ne es membre de un political partise. Personal e professional vive Inter 1982 e 1987 Gitanas Nausėda studiat al facultá de industrial economie del Universitá Vilnius e desde 1987 e 1989 al facultá de economie. Il studiat 1990 e 1992 in Mannheim (Germania). Gitanas Nausėda fat su doctoratu in li annu 1993. Il laborat quam analitico por lituanian bankes. Inter 2008 e 2018 Gitanas Nausėda esset principal analitico del SEB Bank. Desde li annu 2009 esset professor al Universitá Vilnius. Gitanas Nausėda es maritat con Diana Nepaitė-Nausėdienė e li cuple have du filias Gedailė e Ugnė. Political cariera 2004-2009 Gitanas Nausėda esset consiliero del presidente Valdas Adamkus in economic questiones. 2019 Il candidat quam índependent candidate in li electiones presidential de Lituania 2019 e ganiat. Desde li 12-im de julí 2019 il es presidente de Lituania. Lituania Politicos de Lituania
__label__ie Pozuelo de Tábara es un municipie situat in li provincia de Zamora, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de inhabitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Zamora
__label__ie Li Spacie economic europan (EEE) es acord de association signapt in may 1992 per li states membres del Comunitás europan (CE) e li states membres del Association europan del comercie líber (AELE in francés o EFTA in anglés). Europa
__label__ie Babilafuente es un municipie situat in li provincia de Salamanca, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Salamanca
__label__ie Pinedas es un municipie situat in li provincia de Salamanca, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. = Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Salamanca
__label__ie 1 -- 2 -- 3 -- 4 -- 5 -- 6 -- 7 -- 8 -- 9 -- 10 -- 11 -- 12 -- 13 -- 14 -- 15 -- 16 -- 17 -- 18 -- 19 -- 20 -- 21 -- 22 -- 23 -- 24 -- 25 -- 26 -- 27 -- 28 -- 29 -- 30 -- 31 5 decembre es li 339-im die del annu in li calendare gregorian (li 340-im die in annus bissextil). Resta 26 dies til li fine del annu. Evenimentes 1831 - Anteyan presidente del Unit States John Quincy Adams comensa seder se in li Dom de Representatives. 1847 - Jefferson Davis es electet al Senate del Unit States. Nascenties Mortes decembre
__label__ie Candeleda es un municipie situat in li provincia de Avila, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Avila
__label__ie Flores de Ávila es un municipie situat in li provincia de Avila, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Avila
__label__ie Bretó es un municipie situat in li provincia de Zamora, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de inhabitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Zamora
__label__ie Luka Dončić es un professional basketball-sportist de Slovenia. Il nascet li 28-im de februar 1999 in Slovenia e lude desde li annu 2018 in li professional nordamerican basketball-liga NBA por Dallas Mavericks in li USA. Luka Dončić es 2,01 metres alt e pesa 104 kilogrammes Luka Dončić lude sur li position del Point Guard e have un altesse de 201 centimetres e in li annu 2020 il pesat 104 kilogrammes. Il es li filio del-ex baskettballist Saša Dončić, quel ludet por li National representation de Slovenia de basketball. Luka Dončić ganiat pluri premies in li nordamerican basketball-liga NBA. Teams 2015-2018 Real Madrid (Basketball) (Hispania) 2018- Dallas Mavericks (NBA) National selection de Slovenia de basketball Desde li annu 2017 Luka Dončić lude por li National selection de Slovenia de basketball. In li annu 2017 Luka Dončić ganiat con li National selection de Slovenia de basketball li Europan Championatu de Basketball 2017 in Turcia. Basketball Slovenia
__label__ie Li Championatu mundal in nordic ski es on competition de Ski-Saltation,Nordic Combination e Ski travers li país.It es organisat del Federation International de Ski/FIS. Historie In li annu 1924 esset arangeat por li prim vez un Championatu mundal in nordic ski. Til 1939 it evenit annualmen. Desde li annu 1937 it es nominat oficial Championatu mundal in nordic ski. Competitiones
__label__ie El Hornillo es un municipie situat in li provincia de Avila, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Avila
__label__ie Kinderseele (Anim Infantal) es un curt roman scrit in 1919 de Hermann Hesse, originalmen sub li pseudonim Emil Sinclair (li sam pseudonim usat por li libre Demian e quelc altri scrites durant li sam periode pos li Unesim Guerre Mundal). Li roman Kinderseele esset traductet in Interlingue de David MacLeod in li annu 2021. Ligamentes extern Kinderseele: traduction in Occidental Kinderseele: original raconta in german Hermann Hesse Litteratura Litteratura traductet a Interlingue
__label__ie Li Subdistrict Mayen-Koblenz es un subdistrict in Rheinland-Palatinia. It es situat in li nord-ost de Rheinland-Palatinia e in li west de Germania. Li Subdistrict have 213.554 habitantes e un area de 817,25 quadrat-kilometres. Rheinland-Palatinia
__label__ie Palikir es li cité capital del insul-state Micronesia. Li cité es situat in li nord-west del insul Pohnpei. Palikir es un parte del municipie Sokehs. Li cité havet in li annu 2009 4645 habitantes. In li annu 1989 Palikir devenit li cité capital de Micronesia. Micronesia
__label__ie Calabazas de Fuentidueña es un municipie situat in li provincia de Segovia, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Municipies del provincia de Segovia
__label__ie Surabaya es li cité capital de Provincia Ost Java. It es li 2-im max grand cité in Indonesia pos Jakarta. Li cité de heróes In li 10-im de novembre 1945, hay un grand battallie in Surabaya inter homes de surabaya e soldates de Bretonia. Nam hay miles victimes de ti battallie, li date 10-im de novembre comemorat quam “Li Die de Heróes”, e li cité anc titulat “Li cité de heróes” Legende Hay un ancian legende raconta li historie de lucte inter un squale (Sura) e un crocodile (baya). Mult local homes credet que li nómine Surabaya originat de lucte inter li du animales (Sura e Baya). On posse vider li monument de lucte inter Sura & Baya in un parte de li cité. Anniversarie Li anniversarie de Surabaya es li 31-im de may 1293. To es li date de victorie de legion Majapahit (ductet de Raden Wijaya) contra mongolian soldates. Frontieras Surabaya bordurat con altri areas. Indonesia
__label__ie Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela esset li presidente de Sud-Africa inter 2005 e 2009. Il esset li unesim negro quam presidente del land. In recivet li Nobel-Premie in li annu 1993. Il combatte por li egalitá de omne homines in Sud-Africe e contra li politica del Apartheid. Il devet passar 27 annus prison quam prisonario political. Il esset li presidente del organisation ANC, quel combattet contra li apartheid in Sud-Africa. Il nascet li 19 de julí 1918 in Mvezo (Transkei) e morit li 5 de decembre 2013 in Johannesburg (Sud-Africa). De 1999 til 2005 il esset li vice-presidente de Sud-Africa. Desde li 18esim de decembre il es li presidente del partise ANC, quel domina li politica in Sud-Africa. Mandela es membre del popul de Xhosa. Mandela studiat jure e laborat quam advocate. On egarda Mandela quam li patre del modern Sud-Africa. Sud-Africa
__label__ie San Cristóbal de la Cuesta es un municipie situat in li provincia de Salamanca, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Salamanca
__label__ie Li Münchner SC es un hockey sur terre-club in Germania in li cité München. Except Hockey sur terre li Münchener SC anc have branches de ténnis e fitnes. Til li annu 1913 anc hockey sur glacie esset ludet in li club. Li club esset fundat in li annu 1896. Li colores del club es bordeaux rubi-gris. Lusores del Münchner SC in li national selection de Germania de Hockey sur terre München Hockey sur terre
__label__ie Elisabeth II esset li reyessa del Reyatu Unit inter 1952 e 2022. Ella nascet li 21 de april 1926 in London e morit li 8-im de septembre 2022 in li etá de 96 annus in Aberdeenshire. Inter 1947 e 2021 Elisabeth II esset maritat con Philip Mountbatten, qui morit in li annu 2021. Li cuple havet quar infantes. Su filio Charles III succedet la quam monarch. Reyatu Unit
__label__ie Alustante es un municipie situat in li provincia de Guadalajara, in li comunité autonom de Castilia-La Mancha, Hispania. It have un population de inhabitantes. Municipies del provincia de Guadalajara
__label__ie Grajal de Campos es un village situat in li provincia de Leon, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania, li max grand comunité autonom del land. It have un population de inhabitantes. Municipies del provincia de Leon
__label__ie Bilthoven es un village in Nederland. It es parte del municipie De Bilt in li Provincia Utrecht in centre del land. In li annu 2006 Bilthoven havet 21.984 habitantes. In Bilthoven habitat li activiste de Interlingue e Interlingua Piet Cleij. Bilthoven esset pro to un centre del activitá del Interlingua-organisation Union Mundial pro Interlingua. Bilthoven esset fundat circum li station ferroviari quel esset apertet in li annu 1843. In li comense del 20-im secul li nómine del village esset ancor Bilt-station. In li annu 1917 decidet li consilie del village que li nómine es oficialmen changeat in Bilthoven. Nederland
__label__ie Andrzej Szczypiorski esset un famosi autor e political activist de Polonia. Il nascet li 3-im de februar 1928 in Warszawa e morit li 16-im de may 2000 in Warszawa. Ovres Li tema del ovres de Andrzej Szczypiorski es li Duesim Guerre Mundal in Polonia. Su max famosi romanes es: 1971: Msza za miasto Arras 1986: Początek Politcal carriera Andrzej Szczypiorski esset activ in li oposition contra li comunist sistema in Polonia. Il esset arestat durant li militari colpe in li annu 1981. Andrzej Szczypiorski esset pos li fine del comunisme membre in li liberal political partise Unia Demokratyczna. Il esset membre del polones senatu inter 1989 e 1991. Pos su morte in li annu 2000 it esset decovrit que Andrzej Szczypiorski laborat in li annus 50 del 20-im secul por li comunist policie secret. Autores Polonia
__label__ie Asunción es li cité capital de Paraguay. It have plus quam 500 000 habitantes. Li plen nómine del cité es La Muy Noble y Leal Ciudad de Nuestra Señora Santa Maria de la Asunción. Li cité esset fundat in li annu 1537. Cités del Paraguay
__label__ie Marcel Ciolacu es un politico de Rumania. Il nascet li 28-im de novembre 1965 in Buzău e es desde li 15-im de junio 2023 prim-ministre de Rumania. Marcel Ciolacu es membre e desde li 26-im de novembre 2019 presidente del Partise Socialdemocratic. Personal e professional vive Marcel Ciolacu studiat jurisprudentie in Bucarest. Marcel Ciolacu es maritat con Roxana Ciolacu e li cuple have un infante. Political cariera Marcel Ciolacu es activ por li Partise Socialdemocratic. 2012 Marcel Ciolacu es electet in li parlament de Rumania por li Partise Socialdemocratic. 2017-2018 Marcel Ciolacu esset vice-prim-ministre in li guvernament de Mihai Tudose. 2019 Marcel Ciolacu devenit presidente del Partise Socialdemocratic ye li 26-im de novembre 2019. 2020 Marcel Ciolacu esset denov electet in li parlament de Rumania. 2021-2023 Marcel Ciolacu esset presidente del parlament de Rumania. 2023 Marcel Ciolacu devenit prim-ministre de Rumania ye li 15-im de junio 2023 Rumania
__label__ie Consuegra es un municipie situat in li provincia de Toledo, in li comunité autonom de Castilia-La Mancha, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Toledo
__label__ie 1 -- 2 -- 3 -- 4 -- 5 -- 6 -- 7 -- 8 -- 9 -- 10 -- 11 -- 12 -- 13 -- 14 -- 15 -- 16 -- 17 -- 18 -- 19 -- 20 -- 21 -- 22 -- 23 -- 24 -- 25 -- 26 -- 27 -- 28 -- 29 -- 30 -- 31 10 octobre es li 283-im die del annu in li calendare gregorian (li 284-im die in annus bissextil). Resta 82 dies til li fine del annu. Evenimentes 1970 - Fiji deveni índependent del Reyatu Unit. Nascenties Mortes Octobre
__label__ie Dalal Midhat-Talakić es un cantoressa de Bosnia e Herzegovina. Ella nascet li 5-im de august 1981 in Sarajevo e va representar Bosnia e Herzegovina in li Eurovision Song Contest 2016 in Stockholm con Deen e Ana Rucner e li canzon Ljubav je. Desde li annu 1999 Dalal Midhat-Talakić canta in li R&B-duett Erato con Aida Jašarević. Bosnia e Herzegovina Eurovision Song Contest
__label__ie Jennifer Leann Carpenter es un actoressa de television e de cinema de USA. Ella nascet li 7-im de decembre 1979 in Louisville, Kentucky (USA) e ella devenit per li titul-rol de Emily Rose in li horror-film The Exorcism of Emily Rose in li annu 2005. Jennifer Carpenter anc ludet li cardinal rol in horror-film Quarantine e ella esset tre successosi in li misterie-serie de television Dexter 2006 til 2013 e Dexter: New Blood 2021 til 2002 quam Debra Morgan. Jennifer Carpenter es activ quam actoressa desde li annu 1998. Ella es maritat por li duesim vez con musico Seth Avett desde li annnu 2016 e esset maritat inter 2008 e 2011 con li actor Michael C. Hall, qui anc ludet in li serie de television Dexter. Jennifer Carpenter have un infante con su duesim marito Seth Avett. Unit States de America Actoressas
__label__ie Milbertshofen-Am Hart es un districte de München. Milbertshofen-Am Hart have 73.617 habintantes. Sport In li districte Milberthofen-Am Hart es situat li Olympia Park de München in quel evenit li Olimpic Ludes del Estive 1972. Districtes de München
__label__ie Proyo es un lingue constructet mult influentiat del Novial, ma con influenties del Esperanto, Ido, Glosa e Lingua Franca Nova. It posse esser considerat quam un novialide, to es, un lingue derivat de Novial. It esset creat de Brian Mansberger in 2018. Grammatica "pa" preterite "nu" presenti "ha" perfecte "va" futuri "wud" conditional "yeo" customal Planlingue
__label__ie La Hija de Dios (hispan: li filia de Deo) es un municipie situat in li provincia de Avila, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Avila
__label__ie Pozuelo del Páramo es un village situat in li provincia de Leon, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania, li max grand comunité autonom del land. It have un population de inhabitantes. Municipies del provincia de Leon
__label__ie Andavías es un municipie situat in li provincia de Zamora, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de inhabitantes. Geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Zamora
__label__ie 11 julí es li 192-im die del annu in li calendare gregorian (li 193-im die in annus bissextil). Resta 173 dies til li fine del annu. Evenimentes 1616 - Explorator Samuel de Champlain retorna a Quebec. Nascenties Mortes Julí
__label__ie Casas del Puerto de Villatoro es un municipie situat in li provincia de Avila, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Avila
__label__ie Alpanseque es un village situat in li provincia de Soria, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Soria
__label__ie Sancti-Spíritus, Salamanca es un municipie situat in li provincia de Salamanca, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Salamanca
__label__ie Karlovy Vary es un cité in Tchekia. It es situat in li west del land in li region Karlovarský kraj e in li Districte Karlovy Vary. Karlovy Vary es situat in li historic país Bohemia e li cité have in german li nómine Karlsbad. Li cité have 48.776 (2018) habitantes e un area de 59,10 quadrat-kilometres. Karlovy Vary es un famosi cité balneari. Li cité es situat al inboccatura del rivere Teplá in li fluvie Ohře. In li annu 1370 li cité esset promoet quem cité reyal. In li annu 1819 li international Conferentie de Karlovy Vary evenit in li cité. Sport Li hockey sur glacie-club HC Energie Karlovy Vary quel lude desde li annu 1997 in li Extraliga have su hem in li cité. Tchekia
__label__ie Bălți (russ: Бельцы) es un cité in Moldavia. It es situat in li nord del land e it es li duesim max grand cité de Moldavia detra li cité capital Chișinău. Bălți es situat al rive del fluvie Răut. Li cité have 102.457 (2014) e un area de 78,01 quadrat-kilometres. Bălți esset fundat in li annu 1620 e recivet li statu de un cité in li annu 1818. Inter 1812 e 1918 Bălți apartenet a Russia e inter 1918 e 1940 a Rumania. Inter 1941 e 1991 it essset parte del Soviet-Union. Hodie li cité es li economic e cultural centre del nord de Moldavia. In li annu 2004 un majoritá de 53,9 percentes havet russ quam lingue matrin. Moldavia
__label__ie Sud-Dakota es un del 50 states federativ del Unit States de America. It es situat in li nord-west del USA. Li cité capital de Sud-Dakota es Pierre, ma li max grand cité del stat es Sioux Falls. Sud-Dakota have 781 919 (2006) habitantes. In li annu 1889 Sud-Dakota devenit li 40-esim state federativ del USA. Guvernator: Mike Rounds (Partise Republican) States del Unit States de America
__label__ie Ludwig van Beethoven esset un tre famos german-austrian compositor de música classic. Ludwig van Beethoven nascet li 16 de decembre 1770 in Bonn (Germania) e morit li 26 de marte 1827 in Vienna (Austria). Germania Compositores
__label__ie Li Comtia Zadar (croat: Zadarska županija) es un administrativ districte de Croatia. It es situat in li nord del region al costa del Mare adriatic circum li cité Zadar, quel es anc li sede del comtia. Li Comtia Zadar have 170.017 (2011) habitantes e un area de 3646 quadrat-kilometres. Comto (Zupan): Stipe Zrilić (Croat Democratic Comunitá) Cités e municipies Li Comtia Zadar have 6 cités e 28 municipies. Li númere de habitantes es ex li annu 2011. Cités Municipies Croatia
__label__ie Almonacid de Toledo es un municipie situat in li provincia de Toledo, in li comunité autonom de Castilia-La Mancha, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Toledo
__label__ie Râșnov(german: Rosenau) es un cité in Rumania. It es situat in li historical region Transilvania e it apartene al Districte Brașov. li riverette Ghimbășel flue tra Râșnov. Li cité have 15.022 (2011) habitantes e un area de 164,36 quadrat-kilometres. It es situat sur un altore de 635 metres. Li cité es fundat per li German Órden in li annu 1225 sub li nómine Rosenau. It esset mentionat por li unesim vez in un historic documente 1331. Râșnov recivet oficialmen li titul de un cité in li annu 1950. Sport In Râșnov es situat un ski-salteria. Li cité e su salteria es un station in li Bocale Mundel de Ski-saltation. Rumania
__label__ie Santibáñez de Vidriales es un municipie situat in li provincia de Zamora, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de inhabitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Zamora
__label__ie Valdeconcha es un municipie situat in li provincia de Guadalajara, in li comunité autonom de Castilia-La Mancha, Hispania. It have un population de inhabitantes. Municipies del provincia de Guadalajara
__label__ie Alcázar de San Juan es un municipie situat in li provincia de Ciudad Real, in li comunité autonom de Castilia-La Mancha, Hispania. It have un population de inhabitantes. Municipies del provincia de Ciudad Real
__label__ie Ajofrín es un municipie situat in li provincia de Toledo, in li comunité autonom de Castilia-La Mancha, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Toledo
__label__ie Hartwig Löger es un politico de Austria. Il nascet li 15-im de julí 1965 in Selzthal e es desde li 28-im de may 2019 prim-ministre de Austria. Löger ne es membre de un political partise, ma esset nominat del Austrian Popul Partise quam ministre de financies in li annu 2017. Personal e professional vive Pos li scole Löger laborat in li economic branche de assecurantie. Löger volet devenir pilote in li Austrian Federal Armé, ma pro un lesion del genú il devet abandonar ti planes. Inter 2011 e 2017 Löger esset li presidente del direction del assecurantie interprense UNIQA Austria. Hartwig Löger es maritat e have du infantes. Il habita in Vienna. Political cariera 2017 Löger devenit ministre por financies de Austria in li guvernament de Sebastian Kurz. Li Austrian Popul Partise hat proposit le por ti function. 2019 Löger devenit li 28-im de may 2019 prim-ministre de Austria pos que li parlament ha votat contra li prim-ministre Sebastian Kurz in un vote de neconfidentie. Politicos de Austria
__label__ie Leipzig es un cité in Germania. It have 587 857 habitantes. Leipzig es situat in li ost de Germania in li federal land de Saxonia. Leipzig es anc celebri quam un loco por feries. Chef-Borgomastro: Burkhard Jung (Socialdemocratic Partise de Germania) Sport Li cité es li hem del RB Leipzig, quel lude in li Fußball-Bundesliga de Germania, li max-bon Football-liga de Germania. Germania
__label__ie Trigueros del Valle es un municipie situat in li provincia de Valladolid, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Valladolid
__label__ie Karelia es un region historic inter Russia e Finland in li nord de Europa. Li parte de Russia es hodie li Republica de Karelia. Li part de Finland es un del historic regiones de Finland. Li frontiera hodial inter Russia e Finland tra li region de Karelia es un resultate del duesim guerre mundal, o plu precisimen li Guerre Hivernal quel comensat per li invasion de Finland per li Union Sovietic durant li plu grand guerre mundal. Ti guerre concludet quam un perde por li Union Sovietic, ma con quelc territorial concessiones finlandesi, un inter queles li Karelian istme.
__label__ie Libya es un land in Africa. Li capital de Libya es Tripolis. Libya es un índependent state desde 1951. It esset un colonia de Italia. Libya have 6.871.287 habitantes (2018). Chef del state e pri-ministre: Fayez al Sarraj
__label__ie Bulboaca es un municipie e village in Moldavia. It es situat in li Districte Anenii Noi in li centre de Moldavia. Li municipie Bulboaca have 5.036 (2014) habitantes. Li Castelle Mimi es situat in Bulboaca. Ye li 1-im de junio 2023 li sómmite del Europan Political Comunitá evenit in li Castelle Mimi in Bulboaca. Moldavia
__label__ie Hansjörg Jäkle es un ancian Ski-Saltation sportist de Germania. Il nascet li 19-im octobre 1971 in Schonach. Successes Olimpic Ludes de hiverne (1x, 1x, 0x) Aure1994 Lillehammer Team Argente 1998 Nagano Team Championatu mundal de Nordic Ski (0x, 1x, 1x) Argente 1995 Thunder Bay Team Bronze 1997 Trondheim Team Ski-Saltation sportist Sportist (Germania)
__label__ie Sant Martí de Centelles es un municipie situat in li provincia de Barcelona, in li comunité autonom de Catalonia, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Municipies del provincia de Barcelona
__label__ie 739 AC - 738 AC - 737 AC Li annu 738 AC (ante cristo). Evenimentes Rey Tiglath-Pileser III de Assiria invade Israel e fortia it a dar tribute. Constructation del inhabitation de Biskupin nordost de Poznań in Polonia. Nascenties Mortes Annus
__label__ie Morenilla es un municipie situat in li provincia de Guadalajara, in li comunité autonom de Castilia-La Mancha, Hispania. It have un population de inhabitantes. Municipies del provincia de Guadalajara
__label__ie Japan (Japanesi: 日本, 日本国) es un land situat in Asia. It consiste ex 6852 insules, ma 99 percentes del habitantes habita sur li max quard grand insules Honshū, Hokkaidō, Shikoku e Kyūshū. Japan have 127.110.047 (2015) million habitantes e un area de 377.835 quadrat-kilometres sin li insules de Kuriles. Li cité capital de Japan es Tōkyō. Japan es un monarchie parlamentari. Imperator: Naruhito Prim-Ministre: Fumio Kishida Administration Japan es un centralist state. Administrativmen it es dividet in 47 prefecturas. Sport Li max populari sport in Japan es baseball. Sumo es li national sport de Japan.
__label__ie Marke Drakeford es un politico del Reyatu Unit ex Gallia. Il nascet li 19-im de septembre 1954 in Carmarthen e es desde li 13-im de decembre 2018 prim-ministre de Gallia. Drakeford appartene al extrem dextri parte del Labore Partise. Personal vive Mark Drakeford studiat latin in li University of Kent. Pos su studies il laborat in li universitás de Swansea e Cardiff. Mark Drakeford es maritat e have tri infantes. Political cariera 2011 Mark Drakeford es electet in li Assemble de Gallia. 2013-2016 Ministre por sanitá e social aferes in li guvernament de Carwyn Jones. 2016-2018 Ministre por financie li guvernament de Carwyn Jones. 2017-2018 Ministre por li Brexit in li guvernament de Carwyn Jones. 2018 Mark Drakeford es electet li 6-im de decembre 2018 quam presidente del Labore Partise in Gallia e li 13-im de decembre Drakeford es electet quam prim-ministre de Gallia. Reyatu Unit Gallia
__label__ie 1 -- 2 -- 3 -- 4 -- 5 -- 6 -- 7 -- 8 -- 9 -- 10 -- 11 -- 12 -- 13 -- 14 -- 15 -- 16 -- 17 -- 18 -- 19 -- 20 -- 21 -- 22 -- 23 -- 24 -- 25 -- 26 -- 27 -- 28 -- 29 -- 30 -- 31 17 marte es li 76-im die del annu in li calendare gregorian (li 77-im die in annus bissextil). Resta 289 dies til li fine del annu. Evenimentes 1945 - Li Ponte Ludendorff in Remagen, Germania, crula deci dies pos har esset capturat. Nascenties Mortes Marte
__label__ie Molinaseca es un village situat in li provincia de Leon, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania, li max grand comunité autonom del land. It have un population de inhabitantes. Municipies del provincia de Leon
__label__ie Homs es un cité in Siria. It es li cité capital del governament Homs. Homs es situat in li west del país in un fecund valley del fluvie Orontes. Li cité have 652.609 (2004) habitantes e es li triesim max grand cité de Siria. Historie In li antiquitá Homs havet li nómine Emesa. In guerre intern de Siria desde 2011 Homs es un centre del adversario del guvernament de Bashar al-Assad. Siria
__label__ie Donald Franciszek Tusk es li Prim-Ministre del Polonia desde novembre 2007. Il nascet li 22 de april 1957 in Gdańsk. Il studiat historie in Gdańsk. In li annu 2001 Tusk fundat con Andrzej Olechowski e Maciej Płażyński li partise liberal Platforma Obywatelska (Cives Platform). Li 30-im de august 2014 il esset electet quam presidente del Europan Consilie. Tusk es maritat e have du infantes. Prim-ministres de Polonia Europan Union
__label__ie Stevo Pendarovski es un politico de Nord-Macedonia. Il nascet li 3-im de april 1963 e es electet quam presidente de Nord-Macedonia. Pendarovski es un membre del Social Democratic Union de Macedonia. Personal e professional vive Stevo Pendarovski studiat jurisprudentie e political scientie in Skopje. Desde li annu 2008 il es professor por political scienties al universitá de Skopje. Pendarovski es specialist por international politica e securitá. Stevo Pendarovski es maritat e have un filio. Political cariera 1998-2001 Assistent ministre in li ministerie por interni aferes. 2001-2004 Il laborat quam consiliero del presidente Boris Trajkovski. 2004-2005 Presidente del Central Electoral Comission. 2005-2009 Pendarovski esset consiliero del presidente Branko Crvenkovski in externi-political questiones. 2014 Pendarovski esset li candidate presidential del [Social Democratic Union de Macedonia]], ma il perdit in li duesim rond contra Gjorge Ivanov. 2019 Pendarovski es electet quam presidente de Nord-Macedonia. Nord-Macedonia Politicos de Nord-Macedonia
__label__ie Villanueva de Duero es un municipie situat in li provincia de Valladolid, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Valladolid
__label__ie Li Canton de Zug es un del 26 cantones del Confederation Svissia. Li Canton de Zug es situat in li centre del land e es inter li german-parlant regiones del land e german es li official lingue. Li Canton de Zug devenit membre del Confederation Svissia in li annu 1352. Li cité capital e max grand cité del Canton de Zug es Zug e li max alt mont del Canton de Zug es li Rossberg quel es 1582 metres alt. Li Canton de Zug have 120.100 (2014) habitantes e un area de 238,72 quadrat-kilometres. Secun li area Zug es li max litt canton de Svissia, ma it have un alt densitá de population. Li abbreviation por li Canton de Zug es ZG. Li Canton de Zug es egardat quam un del max rich cantones de Svissia. Cantones de Svissia
__label__ie Masueco es un municipie situat in li provincia de Salamanca, in li comunité autonom de Castilia e Leon, Hispania. It have un population de habitantes. = Location e geografie Historie Municipies del provincia de Salamanca
__label__ie Turcia es un land situat in Europa. It have 71,5 million habitantes, de les circum 0,3 milliones pomakes. Li cité capital de Turcia es Ankara, ma li max grand cité del Turcia es Istanbul. Turcia es un membre del NATO desde li annu 1952. Turcia vole devenir un membre del Europan Union e comensat ye li annu 2005 con li negociationes pri un accesion al Europan Union. Pos un reform del constitution Turcia es desde li annu 2018 have un presidiantial sistema de politico. Li presidente nu es anc li chef del guvernament. Presidente e chef del guvernament: Recep Tayyip Erdoğan desde 2014 Turcia
__label__ie Januar -- Februar -- Marte 1 -- 2 -- 3 -- 4 -- 5 -- 6 -- 7 -- 8 -- 9 -- 10 -- 11 -- 12 -- 13 -- 14 -- 15 -- 16 -- 17 -- 18 -- 19 -- 20 -- 21 -- 22 -- 23 -- 24 -- 25 -- 26 -- 27 -- 28 -- 29 27 februar es li 58-im die del annu in li calendare gregorian. Resta 307 dies til li fine del annu (308 dies in annus bissextil). Evenimentes 1594 - Henri IV es coronat Rey de Francia. Nascenties Mortes Februar
__label__ie Li Relvia subterran station Lehel es li decesim station del linea 5 e li ottesim del linea 4 del Relvia subterran de München. It es situat in li district Altstadt-Lehel in li ost de München. Li inaugral del station evenit a li 27-im octobre 1988. Li station have du reles. Relvia subterran de München München
__label__ie Gimenells i el Pla de la Font es un municipie situat in li provincia de Lleida, in li comunité autonom de Catalonia, Hispania. It have un population de inhabitantes. Municipies del provincia de Lleida
__label__ie Februar -- Marte -- April 1 -- 2 -- 3 -- 4 -- 5 -- 6 -- 7 -- 8 -- 9 -- 10 -- 11 -- 12 -- 13 -- 14 -- 15 -- 16 -- 17 -- 18 -- 19 -- 20 -- 21 -- 22 -- 23 -- 24 -- 25 -- 26 -- 27 -- 28 -- 29 -- 30 -- 31 26 marte es li 85-im die del annu in li calendare gregorian (li 86-im die in annus bissextil). Resta 280 dies til li fine del annu. Evenimentes 1169 - Saladin deveni li emir de Egiptia. 1636 - Li Universitá de Utrecht es fundat in Nederland. 1971 – Ost-Pakistan declara índependentie de Pakistan por formar Bangladesh e li Guerre de Liberation por Bangladesh comensa. Nascenties Mortes Marte
__label__ie Guinea-Bissau es un land in Africa. Li land es situat al west-coste de Afrika al Atlántic Ocean. Guinéa-Bissau have frontieras con Senegal e Guinéa. Desde 1973 Guinéa-Bissau es un independent stat. Guinéa-Bissau esset un colonia de Portugal. Guinéa-Bissau have 1.442.029 habitantes. Li capital cité es Bissau. Presidente: Umaro Sissoco Embaló Prim-Ministre: Geraldo Martins
__label__ie Deman il va luder football.
__label__ie Yo plana laborar in un bordelle.
__label__ie Yo posse amar.
__label__ie Bon die senioretta!
__label__ie To ne es mi grand dom.
__label__ie Mersí pro li don.
__label__ie Yo ne comprende german.
__label__ie Li fémina es nud.
__label__ie Qui es li puella in li rosi robe?
__label__ie Lass nos cantar li anglesi canzon.
__label__ie Il save omnicos.
__label__ie Qui es ti fémina?
__label__ie Noi besona vor suporte.
__label__ie Il heredat li dom.
__label__ie Nequí venit!
__label__ie Hodíe noi es in hem.
__label__ie Li rubi jup es nov.
__label__ie Ella es un blond puella.
__label__ie Li Unit States consiste del 50 states federal.
__label__ie Ples clúder li fenestre.
__label__ie Yo have un filia.
__label__ie Yo vole basar te.
__label__ie Ili have du filias.
__label__ie Li bell puella es mi sestra.
__label__ie Yo tre ama te.
__label__ie Veni svimmar con me!
__label__ie Esque tu have sestras?
__label__ie Li cat es brun.
__label__ie No, to ne es mi dom.
__label__ie Esque tu comprende me?
__label__ie Yo have du filias e du filios.
__label__ie Esque vor matre es in hem?
__label__ie Esque yo posse auxiliar te?
__label__ie Hodíe es mi anniversarie.
__label__ie Noi ride e ride.
__label__ie Hay mult birerías in Bavaria.
__label__ie Senioretta Meier es tre bell.
__label__ie To es un cavalle.
__label__ie Quo manca?
__label__ie Il ridet joyosimen.
__label__ie Li tot moné es perdit.
__label__ie E feminisme? Quo tu pensa pri feminisme?
__label__ie Yes, mi nómine es Karen Smith.
__label__ie Janet comprat un jup e un bluse.
__label__ie Il have un filio e du filias.
__label__ie Puelles es puelles e púeres es púeres.
__label__ie Quo vu sercha?
__label__ie Tu es mi princessa.
__label__ie Yo vide un dom in li distantie.
__label__ie U es li surtida?
__label__ie Esque tui menstruation es normal?
__label__ie U es li infantes?
__label__ie Noi incontrat les per hasarde.
__label__ie Vu ne have un cordie.
__label__ie Li land cessat exister.
__label__ie Yo parla Interlingua.
__label__ie Il ama pane e buttre.
__label__ie Phoenix es li cité capital de Arizona.
__label__ie To es un bell robe.
__label__ie Ella have mult robes.
__label__ie Quo vell esser li munde sin féminas?
__label__ie Mi sestra plora sovente.
__label__ie Puellas perdi lor virginitá plu e plu tost.
__label__ie Esque vu have sestras?
__label__ie Li robe es tre bell.
__label__ie Yo conosse li puella.
__label__ie Qui es ti puella?
__label__ie Germania es un parlamentari republica.
__label__ie Li política es li vive.
__label__ie To evenit ante tri dies.
__label__ie Quam yo pensat, ella es un virgina!
__label__ie Yo comprat un nov chapel por mi sestra.
__label__ie Yo es gravid.
__label__ie Yo abomina li soledí. Condamnat die!
__label__ie Me ama te!
__label__ie Yo sercha un long e calid lanin jup.
__label__ie Ella vole basar le.
__label__ie Yo ama te.
__label__ie Ella have un marito e du filias.
__label__ie Yo questiona me, qui ella es.
__label__ie Franco have un blu pantalon.
__label__ie Noi incontrat la per hasarde.
__label__ie Germania es un frigid land.
__label__ie Li bebé esset nud.
__label__ie Il lude football.
__label__ie Qui es vu?
__label__ie Li puella pensa constantmen pri li púer.
__label__ie Ann es un litt puella.
__label__ie Ma yo ne have moné.
__label__ie Il comprat un nov robe por su filia.
__label__ie Tu deve dormir.
__label__ie Esque Toshio ama Sachiko?
__label__ie Yo va luder football deman.
__label__ie Mi jup es tro long.
__label__ie Yo va provar it.
__label__ie Il conosse nos tre bon.
__label__lfn La huteritas es un ramo de la move de anabatisme comunial cual, como la amix e la menonitas, deriva de la Reforma Radical de la sententio 16. La fundor, Jakob Hutter, coraji la crea de comunias comensante en 1528. Pos sua mori en 1536, la credes de la huteritas, spesial la vive en un comunia de benes e pasifisme asoluta, ia resulta en sentos de anios de diaspora en multe nasiones. Los ia comensa migra tra Europa sentral e este. Cuasi estinguida par la sentenios 18 e 19, los ia trova un abitua nova en America Norde. Tra 130 anios, sua popla ia crese de 400 a sirca 45,000. Oji la plu de uteritas vive en Canada ueste e la planos norde de la SUA. Relijio
__label__lfn La familia inuit-aleut inclui nove linguas, parlada par sirca 85 000 persones. Esta linguas es linguas nativa de Alaska, Nunavut, Inuvialuit, Nunavik, Nunatsiavut, Calalitnunat (Gronland), e la penisola Txucotxca a la punto la plu este de Sibir. Lo es divideda entra du ramos: la linguas escimo e la lingua aleut. Aleut es parlada sur la Isolas Aleutian e la Isolas Pribilof. La linguas escimo es ance divideda entre du: la linguas yupic, parlada en Alaska ueste e sude-ueste e en Sibir la plu este, e la linguas inuit, parlada en Alaska norde, Canada, e Calalitnunat (Gronland). Inuit, cual estende tra distantias grande, varia lente de ueste a este, ma ultima la dialetos no pote comprende lunlotra. Per plu sur inuit, con detalias de gramatica, vade a Inuit (lingua) Familias de linguas Americanes orijinal Linguas american orijinal
__label__lfn La cultur Poltavca (rusce: Полтавкинская культура), 2700-2100 aec, ia es un cultur arceolojial de la Eda de Bronze temprana e media, locada a la Rio Volga media de do la canal Don-Volga comensa, a norde a la Curva Samara en Rusia, con un estende este, norde de Cazacstan presente, longa la vale de la Rio Samara, ueste de Orenburg. Lo sembla la cultur de catacombas, presededa par la cultur Iamna, e susededa par la cultur Sintaxta. Lo pare es un mostra temprana de la cultur Srubna. On ave evidentes de influe de la cultur Maicop a sua sude. La sola cosa cual distingui lo de la cultur Iamna es cambias en la seramicas e un crese en cosas de metal. Enteras en tumulos continue, ma con min usa de ocer. On debe suposa ce lo es un popla ci parla un forma de la protoindoiranian temprana, o posible un dialeto satem de protoindoeuropean tarde. Arceolojia
__label__lfn Er Norde es un pais en Europa e, plu spesifada, en la Rena Unida. La capital e site plu grande es Belfast. El ave 13,843 km² e sirca 1,710,300 persones (2004). Er Norde es ance un parte de la isola Eres, e comparti la isola con la Republica de Er. Er Norde ia es la loca de multe lutas entre la popla catolica, ci vide se como Eres vera, e la popla protestante, ci vide se como un parte de la Rena Unida. A Belfast, la maioria de la popla es aora catolica, lo es dise "republican", partisans de las partidas Sinn Fein (estremistes) e SDLP (modera). La engles parlada en Er Norde es "Ulster Scots". Esemplos: Norn Iron = Norde-Er wee = peti youssens = vos. La bandera es la bandera de England, con la Mano Roje de Ulster. Er Norde
__label__lfn La familia de linguas hocan es un grupo ipotesal de familias variosa de linguas parlada en California e Mexico. La lingas es parlada par la pomos a la costa de California, e otra nasiones de americanes orijinal sirca Monte Shasta e Lago Tahoe, e par la Iumanes longo la riva de la Rio Colorado. La nom "hocan" es fundida sur la parola per "du" en alga linguas en la familia: *xwak en proto-Iuman, c-oocj (pronunsiada [ko:kx]) en Seri, hak en Atxumaui, etc. No tota linguistes acorda ce lo es un familia vera , ma la nom es usada per oportunia. Eselen–Iuman Eselen Linguas iuman (vide) Hocan Norte Tximariko Caroc–Xasta Caroc Xasta–Palaihnihan Linguas palaihnihan Atsugewi (†) Achumawi (acc Achomawi) Linguas xastan Konomihu (†) New River Shasta (†) Okwanuchu (†) Shasta (acc Shastika) (†) Linguas pomoan (vide) Iana Salinan Uaxo Linguas american orijinal Americanes orijinal Familias de linguas
__label__lfn La cultur Dnepr-Donets (sirca 5000 a 4000 aec) ia es un cultur mesolitica en la area norde de la Mar Negra e la Mar de Azov entre la Rio Dnepr e la Rio Donets. Lo ia es un cultur xasor-colior cual ia traversa a cultiva temprana. La evidentes economial de la grados la plu temprana ia es cuasi tota de xasa e pexa. Lo ave paraleles con la cultur Samara de la mesma periodo. La cultur ia es susededa par la cultur Iamna. Entera ia es en escavas, con la mor covreda con ocer. A veses, entera ia es per un individua, ma grupos plu grande ia es plu comun, con enteras fada en segues en la mesma tomba. Esta, e otra marcas, indica paraleles con otra cultures, como la Samara, de la Dnepr basa a la Volga media e basa. La ipotese curgan de Marija Gimbutas ia inclui lo en un rejion cultural mlte plu grande, e ia sujeste ce esta es un parte de la abitua prima de la protoindoeuropeanes cual va es developada plu en la cultur Sredny Stog e Iamna. La restas fisical recovreda de la tombas ia es descriveda como tipal europoide. Los es descriveda tipal como cromagnones tarde, con cualias plu masosa ca la popla mediteranean. Arceolojia
__label__lfn Uzbec es un de la linguas turcica e la lingua sola ofisial de Uzbecistan. Lo es parlada par sirca 32 milion parlores nativa en Uzbecistan e otra partes de Asia sentral. Uzbec parteni en la grupo turcica este, un ramo de la familia turcica. Influes esterna inclui farsi, arabi, e rusce. Lingua Linguas turcica
__label__lfn La sivilia nuragal, naseda e developada en Sardinia, la isola du plu grande en la Mar Mediteraneo, ia dura de la eda de bronze (sentenio 18 aec) a la sentenio 2 ec. La nom de la sivilia veni de la monumento la plu tipal, la nurage, un tore-fortres construida per tota la isola. Oji Sardinia ave 7000 nurages. Sardinia
__label__lfn La templos roman antica ia es un de la construidas la plu importante en la cultur roman, e un de la construidas la plu rica en la arciteta roman, an si sola alga ia survive completa. Sua construi e manteni ia es un parte major de la relijio roman antica e tota sites importante ia ave a la min un templo xef como ance santerias peti. Templos Roma antica
__label__lfn Holoturios (holoturoideos) es nonvertebratos de la grupo ecinodermatos, con un corpo retangulo, con simetria radial e pel rua, e con un sirculo de tentaculos sirca la boca. Los es ance nomida "concombres de mar". Animal Biolojia
__label__lfn Myalee es un dotor pediatriste iraci. El ia nase a 1950. El ama aprende linguas de ce el ia es joven e el ia aprende engles, esperanto, persian, curdi, urdu e elefen. El adora lfn per esta razonas : Sua simplia estrema forma de parolas la parolas es conosable e es poca e bonsonante Elefenistes
__label__lfn La simboli matematical es la representa simbolin de ojetos o ideas matematical. Simbolis matematical es usada en matematica, siensas fisical, injenia e economia. Simbolis matematical inclui representas simbolin relativa simple, como la numeros 0, 1 e 2; simboles de funsionas como sin, simboles de operas como "+", simboles consetal como lim e dy/dx, e egalis e variables. Matematica
__label__lfn La Teogonia (de la elinica antica Θεογονία "orijina de la deos") es un obra poesial scriveda par Hesiodo. Lo conteni un de la esemplos la plu antica de la orijina de la universo e la linia de familia de la mitolojia elinica antica. Ta ce nos comensa canta de la musas heliconal, ci abita la monte grande e santa Helicon e dansa sur pedes suave sur la fonte profonda azul e la altar de la fio omnipotiosa de Crono, e, cuando los ia lava sua corpos suave en Permeso o en la Fonte de Cavalo o Olmeio, fa sua dansas bela e encantante sur Helicon la plu alta, e move con pedes enerjiosa. Leteratur Leteratur elinica
__label__lfn Numero es un parola de la Teoria de Cuantia. Un numero es representada par un sinia o un combina de sinias. Lo es usada per espresa un cuantia. Sistemes de numeros Un sistem de numeros es usada per representa numeros par un segue de dijitos. La tipos de tal sistemes la plu importante es la sistem ordinal e la sistem de somas. Sistemes ordinal importante inclui… la sistem desimal la sistem binaria la sistem exadesimal. Esta sistemes usa la plu comun la dijitos arabi. La sistem de somas la plu importante es la sistem de numeros roman. Tipos de numeros La tipos de numeros la plu importante es la numeros natural la numeros intera la numeros rasional la numeros real la numeros complesal. Matematica
__label__lfn Werwolf (pronunsiada [ˈveːɐ̯vɔlf], deutx per "om-lupo") ia es un scema sosialiste nasional, cual ia comensa es developada en 1944, per crea un forsa de resiste cual ta opera a retro de la linias enemin cuando la Aliadas ia avansa tra Deutxland. La membros de esta organiza ia reseta instrui per produi esplodentes fabricada a casa, entra otra capasias. On ia atenta entera esplodentes, muni e armas tra la pais (xef en la rejion de la frontera deutx-polsce ante 1939) per es usada par la Werwolf en sua resiste a pos la defeta de Deutxland, ma la cuantia de material enterada ia es multe basa, e ance pico membros ia sabe do la materiales ia es. Un parte importante de esta materiales ia es trovada par la rusces e multe pico ia es usada par la Werwolf. Deutxland Nazi
__label__lfn Langobarda es la lingua estinguida de la langobardas, un popla germanica ci ia coloni Italia en la sentenio ses. La lingua ia declina de la sentenio sete, ma ia resta cisa usada asta sirca 1000 ec. Langobarda es conservada sola como parolas individua sitada en testos latina. Linguas germanica
__label__lfn La anatomia avial, o la strutur fisiolojial de la corpos de la avias, mostra multe ajustas unica, xef aidante vola. La avias ave un sistem sceletal lejera e musculos potiosa e lejera cual, junta a sua sistemes de respira e de sirculi capas de proportios metabolal alta e furni de osijen, permete vola a la avias. La developa de un beco ia gida a la evolui de un sistem de dijesta spesial ajustada. Esta spesialis anatomial ia fa ce la avias ia gania sua clase propre en la filo de la vertebratos. Avia
__label__lfn Caspar David Friedrich (5 setembre 1774 - 7 maio 1840) ia es un depintor de vista romanticiste deutx, regardada como la artiste deutx la plu importante de sua jenera. Sua interesa xef como artiste ia es la contempla de la natur e sua labora anticlasica xerca espresa un responde sujetal e emosial a la mundo natural.
__label__lfn La conversa grande es la prosede corente de scrivores e pensores ci refere, construi e refina, e compara la labora de sua presedores, distinguida par scrivores en la canon ueste, e es la nom usada en la promove de la Grande libros de la mundo ueste publicida par la la Ensiclopedia Brites en 1952. Lo es la titulo de la volum un de la edita prima de esta colie de libros, scriveda par Robert Maynard Hutchins, e ance un volum ajuntable a la edita su (1990), scriveda par Mortimer Adler. Seguente Hutchins, "la tradision de la ueste es corpida en la conversa grande cual comensa en la matina de istoria e continua asta oji". Adler ia dise: Referes Lias esterna La tradision de la Ueste – capitol un de "La conversa grande" enlinia “La conversa grande” (La esajo clasica de La libros grande par Robert Hutchins) – estraeda estendeda de "La conversa grande" cual veni con la edita du de la Libros grande de la mundo ueste Grupo de discute sur la libro Consetas leteratural Sosiolojia de conose Tradision
__label__lfn La sentenio des-oto es la periodo entre la anios 1701 e 1800 de la eda comun. Avenis 1761 Batalia de la Altas de Abraham. Vinse de Brites contra Frans en Quebec. 1789 Revolui franses. Persones importante Jean-Jacques Rousseau Maximilien Robespierre (La Ami de la popla) (Senior) Voltaire Napoléon Bonaparte Thomas Jefferson (Declara de Autonomia) George Washington Inventas, descovres, e introduis Sentenios Sentenio 18
__label__lfn Un te de bolas es un te dulse, fria o calda, con bolas de tapioca, sago, o coniac, o con pesos de jelatin de coco. La te de bolas ave multe sabores como taro, menta, o pruna asida. Cosini Comeda Bevidas
__label__lfn La Istoria de la Gera de Peloponeso (elinica Ιστορία του Πελοποννησιακού Πολέμου) es un rejistra istorial cual nara la Gera de Peloponeso (431–404 aec) entre la Alia Peloponesan (gidada par Sparta) e la Alia Delian (gidada par Atina). Lo ia es scriveda par Tucidide, un istoriste atinan ci ia servi como jeneral atinan en la gera. Sua nara de la disputa es regardada como un clasica e videda como un de la obras erudita prima de istoria. Leteratur elinica
__label__lfn Lago Tanganyica es un de la Lagos Grande de Africa. Lo es la lago de acua dulse du en grandia, la lago du en volum, e la lago du en profundia en la mundo, en tota casos pos Lago Baical en Sibir. Lo es la lago de acua dulse la plu longa en la mundo. La lago es divideda entre cuatro paises: Tanzania, la Republica Democrata la Congo, Burundi, e Zambia, con Tanzania (46%) e la Congo (40%) conteninte la parte plu grande. La acua core en la sistem de la Rio Congo e ultima en la Mar Atlantica. Jeografia Lagos
__label__lfn La Louvre (franses Musée du Louvre) es la museo de arte plu grande en la mundo e un monumento istorial en Paris, Frans. Un monumento sentral de la site, lo es locada en la riva destra de la Sena en la distrito un de la site. Sirca 38 000 ojeto de la preistoria asta la sentenio 21 es esibida en un area de 72 735 metres cuadrida. En 2017, lo ia es la museo plu visitada en la mundo, con 8,1 milion visitores. Museos en Paris
__label__lfn Teggiano (pron. tedjiano; antica Tegianum, ante nomada Diano) es un vila en Campania, Italia, en la provinse de Salerno. El es 600 metres supra la nivel de mar. El representa la antica Tegianum, un vila ce ia es un parte de Lucania, fada como un colonia par Nero. El ave un castel e eglesas interesante variosa. Sites en Italia
__label__lfn La catedral de Canterbury, en Canterbury (Kent) es un de la strutures cristian la plu antica e conoseda de England. Lo es la catedral de la Arcibispo de Canterbury, gidor de la Eglesa de England e gidor simbolin de la Comunia Anglican mundal. Fundida en 597, la catedral ia es intera reconstruida entre 1070 e 1077. La fini este ia es multe grandida en la comensa de la sentenio 12, e multe reconstruida en la stilo gotica pos un foco en 1174, con un estende a este per conteni la flue de peregrinores visitante la santeria de Thomas Becket, la arcibispo ci ia es asasinada en la catedral en 1170. Lia esterna Paje ueb ofisial Arciteta de England
__label__lfn La Cama (rusce: река́ Ка́ма; tatar: Чулман; udmurt: Кам) es un rio 1805 km en longia en Rusia. Lo es la afluente sinistra la plu longa de la Rio Volga e la plu grande en discarga. A sua conflue, la Cama es an plu grande ce la Volga. Lo comensa en la Republica Udmurt, prosima Culiga, fluente norde-ueste per 200 km, verjente norde-este prosima a Loino per un otra 200 km, alora verjente sude e ueste en Crai Perm, fluente denova tra la Republica Udmurt e alora tra la Republica de Tatarstan, do lo encontra la Volga. Ante la aveni de ferovias, portas importante ia lia la Cama con la basines de la Rio Dvina norde e la Rio Petxora. En la sentenio 19 temprana, la Canal Ecaterininsci Norde ia lia la Cama alta con la Rio Vitxegda (un afluente de la Dvina norde), ma ia es xef abandonada pos sola poca anios per usa minimal. En preistoria, la basin de la Kama ia es un abitada xef per la popla proto-uralica. La estende de proto-uralica ia es datida a sirca 2000 aec, e sua aveni plu temprana ia es a min un o du milenia plu temprana. La area es ancora abitada par membros de la familia de linguas, incluinte la popla mari, udmurt, e comi. Rios
__label__lfn La Universia de Manas es un universia cual ia es instituida seguente un acorda entre la governas de Turcia e Cirgistan re la institui de la "Universia de Manas" turces cirgiz en la capital, Bixcec. Lias esterna Loca ueb ofisial Biblioteca Sentral de la Universia de Manas Jornales siensal de la Universia de Manas Universias en Cirgistan
__label__lfn Parce Nasional de Vesuvio (italian: Parco Nazionale del Vesuvio) es un parce nasional sentrida sirca la volcan Montania Vesuvio, este de Napoli, Italia. La parce ia es fundida en 1991 e el covre un area de sirca 135 cilometres cuadrida, tota en la Provinse di Napoli. Lias esterna Loca ofisial Detales de la cursos en la parce (Italian) Italia
__label__lfn Pietas, traduida como "debe", "fida", "dedica", "relijiosia" o "relijiosia fial" ia es un de la virtuas xef entre la romanes antica. Lo ia es la virtua distinguinte de la eroe fundal, Eneas. La corespondente elinica es eusebeia (εὐσέβεια). Roma antica
__label__lfn Clifford Geertz ia es un antropolojiste american. Bibliografia HyperGeertz©WorldCatalogue: Un amplio, contextual y referencial bibliografía y mediagrafía de todas las obras y declaraciones públicas por Clifford Geertz en todos los idiomas Los usos de la diversidad (1996) (orijinal "Thinking as moral act". Antioch Rev, 28 (1968)) Conocimiento local: ensayos sobre interpretación de la cultures (1994)] (orijinal Local knowledge: Further essays in interpretative anthropology (1983)) Biografia
__label__lfn Ergane es un program de computador per tradui entre multe linguas . Lo es disponable sola per Windows, ma es sin costa. Aora Ergane pote tradui entre 37 linguas. Entre estas es: italian, franses, espaniol, portuges e catalan (tota es fontes de parolas per elefen). Ergane usa esperanto como lingua sentral. Per esemplo, per tradui un parola franses a engles, Ergane no tradui direta de franses a engles. Ergane fa du pasos. Prima, lo tradui de franses a esperanto. Seguente, lo tradui de esperanto a engles. En esta modo, tota tradui es fada a e de Esperanto. Si on pote tradui un lingua X a e de esperanto, donce on pote tradui a e de cada lingua Y cual on pote tradui a e de esperanto). La vocabulos de linguas es furnida como fixes de Microsoft Access. (On pote usa esta bancos de datos per sua intendes propre.) Cada lingua construida nova pote usa Ergane per produi un disionario per multe linguas. Lias esterna http://download.travlang.com/ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pivot_language http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributed_Language_Translation Computador Lingua
__label__lfn La linguas slavica es un su-familia de la familia de linguas indo-european. Esta linguas es trovada en Europa este (Polsca, Txesco, Slovensco, Ucraina, Bielarus, Rusia, Slovenia, Corvatsca, Bosnia, Serbia, Macedonia Norde, e Balgaria) e en partes de nasiones prosima. No incluinte es Magiar (con un lingua uralica) e Romania (con un lingua romanica). La linguas slavica es partida a tre ramos major, con plu su-ramos: Slavica este, incluinte rusce, ucrainsce e bielarusce. Slavice ueste, incluinte... Txesce e slovensce, Sorbsce alta e basa (linguas minor en Deutxland), Polsce, pomeranian/caxubian, e polabian (estinguida). Slavica sude, incluinte... Slavica sude-ueste, incluinte slovenian e la linguas bosnian, corvatsce e serbsce (dialetos un de la otra), Slavica sude-este, incluinte balgarsce e macedonsce. La plu vea forma de slavica como un lingua de leteratur ia es slavonica vea de eglesa. Un forma moderna de esta lingua es medjusloviansce (interslavica). Linguas slavica Familias de linguas
__label__lfn La Martires de Boston es la nom donada en la tradision cuecer a la tre membros engles de la Sosia Relijios de Amis (Marmaduke Stephenson, William Robinson e Mary Dyer) e a William Leddra, ci ia es condenada a mori e esecutada per sua crede relijios su la potia de legi de la Colonia de la Baia de Massachusetts en 1659, 1660 e 1661. Cuecerisme Istoria de la Statos Unida de America
__label__lfn Menonitisme es un ramo de cristianisme anabatiste. Sua nom veni de Menno Simons. La menonitas es conoseda par sua luta contra la violentia e gera. Los ave plu ca du milion membros e es distribuida xef en Canada e la SUA, ma ance en nasiones variosa de Africa e America Sude. Anabatisme
__label__lfn La Sol (simbole astronomial: ) es la stela a la sentro de la sistem solal, composada de lo e oto planetas e otra corpos spasial, incluinte nosa tera. Lo es la orijina xef de enerjia per vive sopra la Tera. Astronomia
__label__lfn La Istoria de Barat ia comensa con la atesta de ativia umana a 75 000 anios ante aora. La Sivilia de la Vale Indo, cual ia crese en la norde-ueste de Barat de 3300 asta 1300 aec ia es la sivilia major prima de Barat. Mahajanapadas En la Eda de la Vedas tarda, un cuantia de renas peti ia covre la sucontinente. Ja a 500 aec, des-ses monarcias e republicas, conoseda como Mahajanapadas, ia estende de Afganistan a Bangla. La periodo ia vide la asende major du de urbanisme en Barat pos la Sivilia de la Vale Indo. Impero Mauria La Impero Mauria ia es un impero potiosa en Barat antica. Axoka ia estende budisme e el ia institui multe monumentos budiste. Sultanias Pos la concista de Persia, la Califa Muslim ia concista Pacistan en 720 ec. En 712 un jeneral arabi, Muhammad bin Casim, ia concista la rejion de la Indo (aora Pacistan) per la Umaianes. Pos alga geras, la crese de la arabis ia es sesada en Pacistan. Istoria de Barat
__label__lfn Tajiri (田尻町; -cho) es un vila locada en la distrito de Sen'nan, Osaca (大阪府泉南郡) Japan. En 2004, la popla de la vila ia es 7,271 e la densia ia es 1,883.68 persones par km². La area es 3.86 km². Tajiri es la plu poca vila en la provinse de Osaca, e lo es plu parte conoseda per sua corpora de la Airoporto internasional de Cansai. (KIX). Jeografia Sites Japan
__label__lfn La impala (nom siensal Aepyceros melampus) es un antilope de este e sude de Africa. La sola membro de la jenero Aepyceros, ia es descriveda a la ves prima par la publica european par zolojiste deutx Hinrich Lichtenstein en 1812. mamal
__label__lfn La Sirenios es un ordina de mamales ce abita sola en la acua e come sola legumes. Los abita rios, estuarios, la costa de mares, e pantanes. Los es acuadinamos e musculosa, e es capas de resta su la acua per periodos longa. La dugongos (familia dugongids) e la manatis (familia tricecids) es en peril de deveni estinguida. Mamal Animal
__label__lfn La alfabeta gurmuci (ਗੁਰਮੁਖੀ "de la boca de la guru") es un scrive sic developada par la guru sic du, Guru Angad (1504–1552). Lo es usada par sices como un de du alfabetas per scrive la lingua pandjabi; la otra es la scrive perso-arabi (xahmuhi - شاہ مکھی, leteral "de la boca de la re)‬ usada par panjabis muslim. La scriveda xef de sicisme, Guru Granth Sahib, es scriveda en gurmuci, en dialetos variosa. Gurmuci moderne ave 38 consonantes, des sinietas per vocales, du sinietas per nasali, e un cual dupli la sona de cualce consonante. Sistemes de scrive
__label__lfn La ateisme es la manca de crede de un dio o dios. On trova lo en Elas e India antica, incluinte la filosofistes Democrito e Epicuro (la atomisme) e Adjita Cesacambalin (la scola de Txarvaca). La ateisme ia esperia un renase en la sentenios 18 e 19 con la crese de siensa, e un crese plu grande en la sentenio 20 con la revoluis comuniste. Si nos ta regarda la ateisme como un relijio, lo ta es la relijio numero tre o cuatro par cuantia de popla, entre islam e induisme, o entre induisme e budisme. (La cristianisme es la plu grande.) La cuantia esata de ateistes no es fasil descovrable, car ateistes no parteni normal a organizas como eglesas. Lojical, ateisme no es un relijio. La razona la plu vea per no crede a Dio es esta de Epicuro, fundida en la defini de Dio como intera bon e intera potiosa: Esce Dio vole preveni la mal, ma no pote? Donce el no es intera potiosa. Esce el pote, ma no vole? Donce el es malvolente. Esce el pote e vole? Donce de do veni la malia? Esce el no pote e no vole? Donce perce nos nomi el Dio? Relijio
__label__lfn Publio Cornelio Tacito ia es un senator e istoriste de la Impero Roman. La partes survivente de sua obras xef, la Arcivos anial e la Istorias, esamina la renas de la imperores Tiberio, Claudio, Neron e aceles ci ia governa en la Anio de la Cuatro Imperores (69 aec). Esta du obras nara la istoria de la Impero Roman de la mori de Augusto en 14 ec asta la Gera iudi-roman un, en 70 ec. On ave bucos sustantial en la testos survivente, incluinte un en la Arcivos anial de cuatro libros. La otra scrivedas de Tacito discute retorica (en forma de dialogo, vide Dialogus de oratoribus), Germania (en De origine et situ Germanorum), e la vive de sua padre par sposi, Agricola, la jeneral encargada de la plu parte de la concista roman de Britan, xef consentrante en sua campania en Britania (De vita et moribus Iulii Agricolae) Tacito es considerada un de la istoristes roman plu importante. El ia vive en lo ce oji on nomi la eda arjento de la leteratur latina, e es conoseda per la cortia de sua prosa latina, como ance per sua comprende penetrante en la psicolojia de la politica de potia. Tacito Biografia Romanes antica
__label__lfn Un planeta es un ojeto (como la Tera o Jupiter) cual orbita un stela. Lo es plu peti ca un stela, e no crea lus. Planetas ave la forma de un sfera. Nosa sistem solal conteni oto planetas, e on conose plu ca sincosento planetas estrasolal, planetas cual orbita otra stelas. Astronomia
__label__lfn La Republica o Politeia (de Πολιτεία en elinica) es un labora influente de la filosofia e teoria political de la filosofiste elinica Platon, scriveda sirca 390 aec. Lo es scriveda en la forma de un conversa socratal. La nom en elinica refere a polis, la terma moderna per site o site-stato. Ma un polis ia es plu ca acel. Lo ia es un modo de la vive; donce un tradui plu coreta ta es "como nos vive como umanas". Filosofia Platon Libros
__label__lfn Mihail Alecsandrovitx Xolohov (1905–84; rusce: Михаи́л Алекса́ндрович Шо́лохов) ia es un noveliste e ganior de la premio Nobel rusce. El ia nase en Veshenskaya, Rusia, un vileta sur la parte basa de la Rio Don. En modo dramosa e realosa, sua scrives major descrive la vives de la popla de esta area. Los inclui la novelas La Don silente de 4 partes, 1928–40), La Don reflue a la mar (1940) e Solo virjin turbada. Sholokhov es ance la autor de Los ia batalia per sua pais padral, un projeta de tre libros sur la Gera Mundal Du. El ia reseta la premio Stalin en 1941, la Ordina de Lenin en 1955, e la premio Lenin en 1960. On ia presenta el con la Premio Nobel per leteratur en 1965. Biografia Leteratur Premio Nobel
__label__lfn La cultur Hoogkarspel ia es un parte importante de la cultur Elp, un cultur de la eda de bronze datida de sirca 1800 a 800 aec. En la desenio de 1960, restas de un tumulo ia es descovreda, e un colonia de cultivores ia es descovreda en la desenio de 1970, datida a sirca 1000 aec. La nom deriva de la vila en cual la descovres ia aveni, en la norde-ueste de Nederland. La nom deriva de la parolas nederlandes hoog ("alta") e kerspel ("parocia" en nederlandes vea). Arceolojia
__label__lfn Cifose (de la elinica κυφός, "jiba") es un curvi convesa nonormal de la spina en la rejiones toraxal e sacral. (La curvi concava nonormal de la rejiones colal e lombal es nomida lordose.) Lo pote es la resulta de maladia dejenerante de la discos, o un nonormalia de developa, plu comun la maladia de Scheuermann; osteoporose con fratis compresante de la vertebras; mieloma multiple; o trauma. Estas causa un desformi de la dorso, videda como un posa malapoiante o la developa de un jiba. En la plu de casos, lo nesesa sola monitori. Ma si lo resulta en dole, difisilias de respira e dijesta, problemes cardiovascular e neurolojial, lo nesesa sirurjia per fusa vertebras per restora un curvi plu natural Medica
__label__lfn Franz Schädle (Westerheim, Baden-Wurtemberg; 19 novembre 1906 - Berlin 1 maio 1945) ia es la comandor ultima de la gardacorpos personal de Adolf Hitler (Begleitkommando SS des Führers) de 5 janero 1945 asta sua mori en 2 maio 1945. Bibliografia Biografia Deutxes Nazis
__label__lfn Fransesco Grimaldi (monaces: Françuà primu) ia es un gidor genoves cual ia catura la fortres de Monaco a la note de 8 janero 1297. El ia es la fio de Guilelmo Grimaldi e Jacoba, un nobil genoves. Vestida como un monce, el ia es salutada a la portas de la castel de Monaco. A pos, el e un grupo de omes ia saisi la castel con sua cusin Rainier 1. La aveni es onorada en la scermo eraldial de Monaco, en cual la suportores es du monces armada con spadas. El ia domina la fortres tra cuatro anios ante deveni espulsada par la genoveses. Tal, Fransesco ia fali institui un governa de Grimaldis en Monaco, ma ia fa la atenta prima de esta. El ia sposi Aurelia del Carretto en 1295 e la sposia no ia produi enfantes. La Grimaldis de oji no es desendentes de Fransesco. Pos sua mori en 1309, el ia es susededa par sua cusin Rainier 1, Senior de Cagnes. La desendentes de sua cusin governa ancora Monaco. A plu ca sento anios pos la colpa, la Grimaldis ia compra Monaco de la Corona de Aragon en 1419, e ia deveni la gidores ofisial e nondisputada de "la Roca de Monaco". Biografia Monaco
__label__lfn Damas es un jua stratejial sur un table de cuadros, entre du juores ci alterna en move un calculo (peso) en dirije diagonal. Cada juor ave calculos de un color, blanca o negra, e con estas el atenta prende los de sua competor par salta supra los. La calculos supra cual on salta es sutraeda de la table. Si un juor pote prende calculos, el debe. Donce, un competor intelijente pote furni un calculo prendable per crea un situa en cual sua competor, pos prende la calculo, va perde plu calculos cual el ia prende. Si un calculo ateni la cuadros la plu distante, lo deveni un dama. La dama pote move como la bispo en xace: tra multe cuadros diagonal si on desira. Lo pote prende ance otra calculos en esta modo. La table orijinal de damas (nomida draughts en engles) ave dimensiones de 10×10 cuadros, ma la varia engles (English draughts o American checkers) ave dimensiones de 8×8 cuadretas. En damas engles, la dama move como un calculo comun, ma pote move e prende a retro ance. Multe otra varias de damas esiste, relatada con nasiones diversa. Jua
__label__lfn La figato es un organo en vertebratos, incluinte umanas. Lo ave un rol major en metaboli e ave multe roles en la corpo, incluinte reserva de glicojen, sintese de protena de plasma, e la desveneni de drogas. Lo produi ance bile, cual es importante per dijesta. Parolas medical referente a la figato usa "epato-", cual veni de la parola elinica per figato (hepar). La figato umana adulte pesa normal entre 1,3 e 3,0 kilogrames. Lo es un organo mol, brun rosin, e formida como un bumerang. Lo es la organo du en grandia, pos la pel, e la plu grande a la interna de la corpo. Lo resta su la diaframa a la lado destra de la adomen. La figato resta a la destra de la stomaco e suporta la vesica bilal (cual reserva bile). La figato es un de poca organos umana cual pote recrea sua partes destruida. Tan poca como 25% de figato es nesesada per recrea la figato completa! Anatomia Medica
__label__lfn Mares covre sirca tre cuatris (71%) de la surfas de la tera, e sirca un dui de mares es profonda de plu ca 3000 m. La corpo de acua sal – la Mar Mundal – es divideda par la continentes e arcipelagos a sinco corpos: la Mar Pasifica, la Mar Atlantica, la Mar Indian, la Mar Artica e la Mar Antartica. Estas es divideda a corpos plu peti, como la Mar Baltica, la Mar Caribe, etc. Vide Mares, golfos, e stretas per un lista plu completa. Jeolojial, un mar es un area de crosta de tera covreda par acua. Esta crosta es un strato de lava solidida, covrente la litosfero de la tera, estra la continentes. La area de la Mar Mundal es 361 milion km², sua volum es 1370 milion km³, e sua profundia promedia es plu ca 3000 m. Esta numeros no inclui la mares no juntada a la Mar Mundal, como la Mar Caspian. La masa intera de la idrosfera es sirca 1,4 x 10²¹ kg, o sirca 0,023% de la masa intera de la tera. La mares major: Mar Antartica Mar Artica Mar Atlantica Mar Indian Mar Pasifica La Atlantica e la Pasifica es comun divideda a partes Norde e Sude. En esta modo, nos ave la Mares Sete de naras. Jeografia Lista
__label__lfn Per plu, vide categoria teatro Teatro (de la parola elinica θέατρον) es la braso de la artes de presenta cual inclui la presenta de naras ante un popla, usante parla, jesti, musica, dansa, sona, fondos, e cualce otra modos nesesada. La teatro ueste veni, xef, de la drama elinica antica, de cual lo ia empresta terminolojia tecnical, clasi en jeneros, e multe de sua temas, carateres e tramas. La artiste teatral Patrice Pavis defini teatralia, lingua teatral e scrive teatral como espresas sinonim cual difere teatro de otra artes de presenta, leteratur e la artes en jeneral. La teatro moderna, en un defini larga, inclui teatrales e musica teatral. On ave lias entre la teatro e la formas artal de baleto, opera (cual usa presentas en un teatro con vestes fantasin, acompaniada par canta e orcestra) e otra formas diversa. Teatro
__label__lfn La istoria antica de Iberia refere a la avenis en la penisola Iberia en la eda antica. Cronolojial, lo comensa a la fini de la milenio 2 e la comensa de la milenio 1 aec (cuando referes a esta rejion comensa apare en scrivedas); lo fini con la Anticia Tarda, con la declina de la Impero Roman (de la crise de la sentenio 3), la invade de la poplas germanica (en 411), e la coloni visigoto de Espania (cual ia dura asta la anio 711). En la milenio 1 aec, multe contatas ia aveni en la este e sude de la penisola entre la poplas nativa e la poplas coloniste istorial de la Mediteraneo este: fenisias, elinica e punicas. A fini de la sentenio 3 aec, en la contesto de la geras punica, la romanes ia comensa la romani. Anticia Istoria de Espania Istoria de Portugal
__label__lfn La Re Artur ance conoseda como Artur Pendragon e Artur de Britan, es un carater importante en la leteratur european, spesial en la engles e franses, en cual es representada como la re ideal e en la gera e en la pas. Leteratur european
__label__lfn Euripede (Εὐριπίδης, sirca 480 - 406 aec) ia es un scrivor de trajedias de Atina clasica. El es un de la tre scrivores de trajedias de Elas de ci un cuantia sinifiante de sua obras ia survive. La eruditas antica ia sujeste ce el ia scrive plu ca 90 obras teatral. De estas, 18 o 19 ia survive cuasi completa.
__label__lfn Aconcagua (pronunsia en espaniol: [akoŋˈkaɣwa]) es un monte en la cadena xef de la Andes, en la provinse Mendoza en Arjentina. Lo es la monte la plu alta en la Americas, e la plu grande estra Asia, con un altia de 6960.8 metres. Lo es 112 km norde-ueste de la capital de la provinse, la site de Mendoza, sirca 5 km de la provinse San Juan, e 15 km de la borda entre Arjentina e Txile. Lo es un de la montes nomida "la sete culminas de la sete continentes". Jeografia
__label__lfn La Salmo de San Eulalia (franses: Séquence o Cantilène de sainte Eulalie) es la ajiografia franses la plu temprana cual survive, e un de la testos la plu temprana scriveda en la lingua d'oïl (franses antica). Lo veni de sirca la anio 880. Leteratur medieval franses
__label__lfn La Castel de Windsor (engles: Windsor Castle) es la abitada real en Windsor en la contia engles de Berkshire. Lo es conoseda per sua arciteta e la asosia longa con la familia real brites. La castel orijinal ia es construida en la sentenio 11 pos la invade normande de England par William la concistor. De la rena de Henry 8, lo ia es usada par tota la monarcas, e es la palasio ocupada la plu longa en Europa. Casteles de England
__label__lfn La familia de linguas uacaxan es parlada en Columbia Brites sirca e sur la Isola Vancouver, e en la canto norde-ueste de la Penisola Olympic de la stato de Washington, a la lado sude de la Streta de Juan de Fuca. Como tipal en la linguas de la Pasifica Norde-Ueste, la linguas uacaxan ave colies de consonantes multe grande, e la consonantes comun aveni en grupos complicada. La familia ave sete linguas, tota menasada par estingui: Uacaxan norde (acc cuaciutlan, kwakiutlan) Haisla (acc xaʼislak'ala, X̌àh̓isl̩ak̓ala) con sirca 200 parlores Cuacuala (acc kwak'wala, kwakiutl, lekwala, liq̓ʷala) con sirca 235 parlores Heiltsuc-oueciala (acc heiltsuk-oowekyala, bella bella) con sirca 200 parlores Uacaxan sude (acc nootkan) Nutxanult (acc nuu-chah-nulth, nuučaan̓uł, nootka, nutka, aht, t'aat'aaqsapa) con sirca 510 parlores Nitinat (acc nitinaht, diidiitidq, diitiidʔaatx̣, nitinat, ditidaht) con sirca 30 parlores Maca (acc makah, qʷi·qʷi·diččaq, q'widishch'a:'tx) estinguida (parlor final ia mori en 2002) Lingua Linguas american orijinal Familias de linguas
__label__lfn La lejenda negra espaniol es un promove de propaganda promoveda par scrivores brites, nederlandes o otras nasionalias en la sentenio 16, de cual la ojeto ia es redui la prestijia e influe de la Impero Espaniol en sua Eda Oro. An si lo ia orijina en eda de compete political, comersial e relijial forte plu ca tre sentenios ante aora, la lejenda ia ariva a nosa dias en forma de interpretes contorseda antiespaniol sur avenis istorial como la concista de America, la Incuisisio o la Reconcista. Antiespaniolisme
__label__lfn La Batalia de la Rio Crooked ia es un scaramuxa entre las forsas mormonistes e la militia statal de Missouri. Un de la batalias xef de la Gerra Mormoniste de Missouri de 1838, la gera fini con la esclui de la mormonistes de Missouri. Mormonisme
__label__lfn Mediteraneanisme es un ideolojia cual clama ce la cultures mediteranean ave cualias distinguida de otras. Giuseppe Sergi, un antropolojiste de la sentenio 20 temprana, ia declara ce la popla mediteranean ia es "la plu grande raza... derivada no de la popla negra no de la blanca... un reserva autonom en la familia umana". Sua teorias de cualias razal no es suportada par antropolojistes. La faxisme italian ia adere forte inisial a un varia simil de mediteraneanisme cual ia declara ce un lia ia esiste entre tota la cultures e poplas mediteranean, frecuente ponente la popla e cultur mediteranean supra otra cultures. Esta forma de mediteraneanisme ia oposa la teoria razal nordiciste cual ia es comun en Europa norde, sentral e norde-ueste cual ia categori Europa sude o la popla mediteranean como inferior a la popla nordica. Mediteraneo
__label__lfn Afganistan es un pais en Asia. La area es sirca 647 500 cilometres cuadrida. La cuantia de popla, en la anio 2007, ia es sirca 31 889 923 persones. La site capital es Cabul. La linguas major es dari 50%, paxtun 35%, linguas turcica 11%, 30 linguas minor 4%. Jeografia Afganistan es un pais montaniosa. Lo ave planos en la norde e sude-ueste. Jeografia Paises de Asia
__label__lfn Guadelupe es un rejion isolal de Frans en la Antiles Minor, en la este de la Mar Caribe. La area es sirca 1628 cilometres cuadrida. La cuantia de abitores, en la anio 2007, ia es sirca 452 776 persones. La site capital es Basse-Terre. La lingua major es franses. Antilies Jeografia
__label__lfn Volksgemeinschaft (pronunsia deutx: [ˈfɔlksɡəˌmaɪnʃaft]) es un espresa deutx sinifiante "comunia de la popla". Esta espresa ia deveni famosa en la Gera Mundal Prima cuando la deutxes ia asembla per suporta la gera, e ia apela a la idea de uni la popla ultra la divides de clase per ateni un intende nasional. Nazisme Deutxland Nazi Nasionalisme deutx
__label__lfn Hwaseong (화성시) es un site en la provinse de Gyeonggi-do en Corea Sude, sude e ueste de la capital Seoul. El ave la plu grande area per cultiverias en la provinse, e estende a la mar en la ueste. La cuantia de popla ia es 286,736 en 2004. Hwaseong ance es la loca per un serie de omisides ce ia ocure entre 1986 e 1991, posable de la mesme mator. Un sinema supra la serie de omisides ia es creada en 2003 con la nom Memorias de Omosida (살인의 추억). Lias esterna Paje de rede ofisial Galbijim Wiki paje supra Hwaseong Corea Sude
__label__lfn La linguas papuan ueste es un familia de sirca 24 linguas papuan de la Penisola Birds Head ("testo de avia", acc Vogelkop o Doberai) de Gine Nova ueste estrema, la isola de Halmahera e visines, parlada par sirca 220,000 persones. La lingua de esta familia la plu bon conoseda es Ternate (sirca 50,000 parlores) de Isola Ternate, cual es la lingua franca de la rejion e cual, con sua visin Tidore, ia es la linguas de la sultanias medieval de Ternate e Tidore, famosa per sua compete en la comersia de spises. Con Ternate como un esemplo, la fonolojia de esta linguas es cuasi identical a elefen, sin v, z, x, e j, ma incluinte tx, dj, e ny, e con la mesma sinco vocales. Los no usa tonos. Lingua Familias de linguas Gine Nova
__label__lfn Vicente Ferreira da Silva (1916–1963) ia es un filosofiste important brasileiro. Referes /> Lias esterna Alain Guy et ses collaborateurs, Le Temps et la Mort dans la philosophie contemporaine d'Amérique latine, André Caravelle. Cahiers du monde hispanique et luso-brésilien. Année 1994 pp. 296-297, Fait partie d'un numéro thématique: 501 ans plus tard : Amérique Indienne.. Biografia Filosofistes Scrivores brasileiro brasileiro
__label__lfn La alfabeta arabi es un alfabeta de sola consonantes, usada per scrive la lingua arabi e alga linguas influeda par la cultur arabi e la relijio de islam, per esemplo farsi, urdu, e azerbaijani. En la pasada, el ia es ance usada per scrive linguas como turces. La scrive es de destra a sinistra, e la plu de leteras es juntada. Ave formas variante per plu de leteras dependente si la letera es a la comensa de la parola, en la media, a la fini, o si el es usada isolida. Sistemes de scrive Lingua
__label__lfn Un paroleta es un parola cual ave un rol plu gramatical ce la majoria de parolas. Comun incluida en la categoria de paroletas es pronomes, determinantes, preposadas, e juntas. Ance incluida es alga averbos, pd los no derivada de ajetivos, e la paroletas de tempo, modo, e aspeta (comun cortida a "tma"). En cualce lingua, la categoria de paroletas es "cluida" (de un cuantia limitada), contrastante con parolas comun (nomes, verbos, ajetivos, e la plu de averbos), cual es "abrida" (asetante de la ajunta de parolas nova). Comun, paroletas es peti (cual es la razona per la sufisa "-eta"). Lo es comun ce paroletas no varia como otra parolas, ma esta no es universal. Per esemplo, la determinante "la" en linguas romanica varia per acorda con la seso e numero de se nom, e la pronomes en multe linguas varia tan multe como o an plu ca nomes. Linguistica
__label__lfn Rata es un rodente de la jenera Rattus, cual sembla un mus grande, tipal con beco puntida e coda longa sin pelo. La spesies la plu importante per umanas es a rata negra (Rattus rattus) e la rata brun (Rattus norvegicua). Rodente Mamal
__label__lfn La mesohil es un matris jelatinosa a la interna de un sponje. Lo pleni la spasio entre la pinacoderma esterna e la coanoderma interna. La mesohil semble un forma de teseda liante e conteni alga selulas ameboide variosa e elementos fibrosa e sceletal. Biolojia
__label__lfn Dappa Kali es un jua cual es popular en la rejiones de la norde de Kerala, spesial en Cananor. Esta jua nesesa un cuantia notable de eserse fisical e es xef juada per la xicos. La jua es ance conoseda como chattiyeru e chilleru en otra rejiones de Cananor. Dappa Kali es un forma diferente de la jua Lathi kali xef juada en la Distrito de Kasaragod. Esta jua es juada entre du ecipos. Lo es composada de 10 blocos de marmo pilada la un sur la otras. Un ecipo ojeti esta pila e direta cuando los colpa lo, sua seguente ojeto es de manteni como esta en cuando la otra ecipo atenta de la reordina. La ecipo defendente pote fa sorti la membros de la otra ecipo en la colpa con la bal en cualce loca estra la testa e su la jenos.
__label__lfn La Montes Saian es un cadena de montes en Sibir sude. En la pasada lo ia es la borda entre Rusia e Mongol. La montes enorme e lagos fria sude-ueste ede Tuva inisia la tribuis cual conflue e deveni un de la rio major de Sibir, la Rio Ienesei, cual flue norde per plu ca 3000 km a la Mar Artica. Esta es un area isolida e protejeda, cluida par Rusia de 1944. Seguente Sevyan I. Vainshtein, la pastori de renos en la Saianes, como fada par la Evencis, es "la forma la plu vea de pastori de renos e es asosiada con la doma la plu temprana de la renos par la popla samodeica de la taiga de la Montes Saian a la comensa de la milenio prima ec.... La rejion saian ia pare es la orijin de la complesa economial e cultural de xasores e pastores de renos cual on pote vide aora entre la grupos variosa evenci e la popla de la area de la Sayanes. Seguente Juha Hanhunen e otra linguistes, la loca orijinal de la linguas uralica es locada en Sibir sude-sentral en la rejion de la Montes Sayan. Jeografia Montes
__label__lfn Asi es un lista de la dios e divas en mitolojia norsce (e partal en mitolojia germanica plu jeneral). Nos no ave regulas ofisial per transcrive la nomes per usa en lfn, ma alga sustituis simple pote es usada: æ, ä > ae ø, ö > o á, é, í, ó, ú > a, e, i, o, u ð > d þ > t j > i, j- (inisial) r, n final pos un consonante pote es cadeda o cambiada a -er, -en k, y es retenida Si on vole ajunta un article sur un de esta divines, indica un lia a lo a su. Dios Divas Mitolojia norsce antica
__label__lfn KONE es un corpora internasional en Espoo, Finland, cual furni servis de injenia. Lo emplea sirca 27 000 persones. Lo furni asendadores e scaleras rolante entre otra servis. La compania ave 800 locas en plu ca 40 paises. En junio 2005 la compania ia deveni du companias separada. Economia Companias de Finland
__label__lfn Escilo (en elinica Αἰσχύλος Aiskhulos) ia es un scrivor de trajedias elinica. El es frecuente descriveda como la padre de la trajedia. La conose de la academicistes de esta jenero comensa con sua labora, e la comprende de la trajedias plu temprana es xef basida en deduis de sua teatrales survivente. Seguente Aristotele, el ia estende la numero de carateres en la teatro e ia permete disputa entre los; ante la carateres ia sola interata con la coro. Biografia Elinicas antica
__label__lfn La ordina Antoserotal conteni sola un familia (la Antoserotase). Lo conteni tre jeneras: Antosero, Foliosero, e Sferosporosero. La nom de la familia es derivada de la nom de Antoseros, cual sinifia corno-flor, per la forma tipal de sua sporofites. Planta
__label__lfn Sami es un nom jeneral per un grupo de linguas e dialetos de la familia de linguas uralica, parlada par sirca 20 000 a 30 000 de la samis, ci abita en Sami (Sapmi) en la partes norde de Noria, Sveria, e Suomi, e la partes norde-ueste de Rusia. Un esemplo (en sami norde): Ačče min, don, gutte læk almin. Basotuvvus du namma. Bottus du rika. Shaddus du datto, moft almest, nuft maidai ædnam alde. Adde migjidi odna bæive min juokkebæivalaš laibbamek. Ja adde migjidi min velgidæmek andagassi, nuftgo migis addep min velgolažaidasamek andagassi. Ja ale doalvo min gæččalusa sisa. Mutto bæste min bahast erit. Dastgo du læ rika ja fabmo ja gudne agalašvutti. Amen. Lingua Linguas uralica
__label__lfn La introdui de cristianisme en Danmarc ia es un prosede longa cual ia causa la sustitui la cristianisme per la relijio tradisional nordica como la relijio dominante en Danmarc. En la periodo entre 700 e 1300 la pais ia esperia un cambia cultural grande, car la sosia tradisional tribal ia es recambiada par un monarcia sentrida, seguente la model de Europa ueste. Esta periodo inclui la cambia entre la preistoria e la eda medieval dansce e coaveni con la eda vicing. La developa la de eglesa dansce ia es un parte de la istoria de la eglesa en Europa e multe cambias cual aveni en lo ia aveni ance en Danmarc. Danmarc Istoria de cristianisme
__label__lfn Epistemolojia es la parte de la filosofia ce esplora la qualia, orijina e limitas de la conose umana. El es un parte multe importante de la filosofia, ce multe relate a otra partes, per esemplo a la filosofia de siensa, a la metafisica e a la filosofia de matematica. Vide Teorias de Epistemolojia. Filosofia
__label__lfn Hugo Ernst Mario Schuchardt (4 febrero 1842 - 21 april 1927) ia es un linguiste deutx, conoseda par sua labora en la linguas romanica, la euscara, e linguas miscada, incluinte creoles, pijines e lingua franca. Biografia Deutxes Linguistes
__label__lfn Emmanuel Jean-Michel Frédéric Macron es la presidente de Frans de 14 maio 2017. El es un membro de la partito En Marche. El ia nase a 21 desembre 1977 en Amiens. Emmanuel Macron ia labora como bancor. Entre agosto 2014 e 2016 Emmanuel Macron ia es ministro de finansia en la governo de la presidente François Hollande. Emmanuel Macron ia es membro de la Partito sosialiste de Frans de 2006 a 2009. En la anio 2017 el ia fundi sua propre partito En Marche. Emmanuel Macron es sposida con Brigitte Trogneux. Politica Biografia Frans
__label__lfn Frank-Walter Steinmeier es la presidente de Deutxland de 2017. El es membro de la Sosial Democrata Partito de Deutxland. Frank Walter Steinmeier ia es ministro de esternas de Deutxland entre 2005 e 2009 e entre 2013 e 2017. Frank-Walter Steinmeier ia studia lege e siensa political en Giesen. El ia labora a la universia de Giesen. Frank-Walter Steinmeier es sposida con la judor Elke Büdenbender e la duple ave un fia. Politica Biografia Deutxland
__label__lfn La numeros real estende la cuantia de la numeros rasional. Los es numeros cual nos no pote espresa como fratos de du numeros intera; nos pote presenta los sola como valuas aprosima. Si nos ta usa fratos desimal, nos ta nesesa un numero nonfininte de dijitos pos la virgula per presenta esata los. Esemplos: {| class="wikitable" align="left" Matematica
__label__lfn Agila es la nom comun per multe avias grande xasante de la familia Accipitridae. Los parteni a alga grupos de jenera, no tota de los prosima relatada. La plu de la 60 spesies es de Eurasia e Africa. Estra esta area, sola 14 spesies pote es trovada: du en America Norde, nove en America Sude e sentral, e tre en Australia. La corpo de la agila es potiosa, con testas e becos pesosa. Los ave becos oncin grande per lasera la carne de sua preda, gamas forte e musculosa, e talones forte. La fema de tota spesies de agilas es plu grande de la mas. Per sua grandia e potia, los es ordinada a la culmina de la cadena de comedas en la mundo de avias. La oios de la agila es multe potiosa. Lo es estimada ce la agila militar (Polemaetus bellicosus), de ci sua oio es plu ca du veses tan longo como un oio umana, e on ave un agia vidal de 3.0 a 3.6 vesesa lo de umanas. Esta agia permete agilas per vide sua predas de distantias multe longa. La agia es atribuida xef a la pupiles multe grande cual garantia minima difrata de la lus entrante. Avia
__label__lfn La petxeneges ia es un popla turcica de la stepes de Asia Sentral ci ia parla la lingua petxeneg. Referes Fontes prima Anna Comnena: The Alexiad (Translated by E. R. A. Sewter) (1969). Penguin Books. Constantine Porphyrogenitus: De Administrando Imperio (Greek text edited by Gyula Moravcsik, English translation b Romillyi J. H. Jenkins) (1967). Dumbarton Oaks Center for Byzantine Studies. Eda medieval
__label__lfn Husain ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (arabi: حسين بن علي بن أﺑﻲ طالب) ia es la fio de Ali e Fatima Zahra (fia de Muhammad). Husain es un figur importante en islam car el es un membro de la familia de Muhammad. Islam
__label__lfn La Batalia de Stalingrad ia es la plu vasta fronti de la Gera Mundal Du, en cual Deutxland e sua alias ia combate Uni Soviet per la controla de la site de Stalingrad (aora Volgograd) en Rusia sude. Marcada par combates en spasio prosima ferose e ataca de aira sur nonmilitares, lo ia es la plu vasta (cuasi 2.2 milion persones empleada) e plu sanguosa (1.8-2 milion matada, ferida o caturada) batalia en la istoria de gera. Istoria Gera Mundal Du
__label__lfn Azerbaidjan es un pais entre du continentes (Europa sude-este e Asia sude-ueste), cual es a lado de Rusia a norde, Sacartvelo a norde-ueste, Haiastan a este, Iran a sude, Turcia a ueste e la Mar Caspio a este. Azerbaidjan ance inclui la Republica Autonom de Nahtxivan, un enclave, cual es a lado de Haiastan a norde e este, Iran a sude e ueste, e Turcia a norde-ueste. La plu parte de la pais es en Asia e, per la Nasiones Unida, es un pais asian. La area es sirca 86 600 cilometres cuadrida. La site capital es Bacu.
__label__lfn La Alpes (Deutx: Alpen; Franses: Alpes; Italian: Alpi; Slovenian: Alpe) es la nom de un de la cadenas de montes la plu grande en Europa, estendente de Osteraic e Slovenia en la este, tra Italia, Suiz, Lictenstain e Deutxland asta Frans en la ueste. La monte la plu alta en la Alpes es Mont Blanc ("monte blanca"), cual ave 4 808 metres de altia, a la frontera entre Frans e Italia. Etimolojia La parola en Lingua franca nova "Alpes" veni de la latina Alpes (cual ance es usada en otra linguas como espaniol, franses e portuges, en catalan es Alps). Maurus Servius Honoratus, un comentor anticin de Vergilio, dise en sua comenta (A. X 13) ce tota la montes alta es nomida Alpes par la celtas. La parola ta es comun en italo-celta, car la linguas celta ave parolas per montes alta derivada de alp. Jeografia Europa
__label__lfn Un furnor de eletrica es un compania en la industria de enerjia eletrical cual es envolveda en jenera e distribui eletrica per vende en un mercato regulada. La industria de furnores de eletrica es un furnor xef de enerjia en multe paises. Enerjia eletrica
__label__lfn La alfabeta cirilica e usada en Rusia, Ucraina, Bielarus, Balgaria, Macedonia Norde, Serbia, Tsernagora, Cazacstan, Cirgistan, Tadjicistan, multe linguas minor de Sibir, e como un alternativa en alga otras. Lo es ance la sola alternativa a la leteras latina usada en elefen. Lo es nomida per onora du frates de la Impero Bizantian, San Ciril e San Metodio, ci ia crea la alfabeta glagolitica plu temprana. Lo es derivada de la alfabeta elinica, con alga leteras de la alfabeta glagolitica, par studentes de Cyril and Methodius en la sentenio nove ec en la Impero Balgarsce Prima. La alfabeta cirilica per rusce (1) La vocales palatida en la plu de locas, no es palatida pos j, tx, x, e xtx. (2) La sinia dur: usada per separa prefisas de un vocale seguente con /j-/. (3) La sinia mol: usada per indica ce la consonant presendente es palatida. La ordina de la alfabeta cirilica como usada par elefen: nota: e es usada sin palatali en lfn; on pote usa і per и, si desirada. Per aida con la transcrive entre la alfabetas cirilica e latina en la lingua elefen, vade a Transcrive de cirilica a latina! Sistemes de scrive Lingua
__label__lfn Volodimir Olecsandrovitx Zelensci (ucrainsce: Володимир Олександрович Зеленський) es la presidente de Ucraina de 2019. El ia nase a 25 janero 1979 en Crivi Rih e es de 20 maio 2019 presidente de Ucraina. Volodimir Selensci ia labora como ator asta sua eleje como presidente. En la serie de televisa Servor de la popla el ia jua la rol de la presidente de Ucraina. En la anio 2019 Volodimir Zelensci ia fundi la partito political Servor de la popla. De la anio 2003 Volodimir Zelensci es sposida con Olena Zelensci (ante la sposia Ciiaxco) e la duple ave un fia e un fio. Politica Biografia Ucraina
__label__lfn Esta xico es intelijente.
__label__lfn Do es la tua sala?
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea longo la rio.
__label__lfn Do tu vade?
__label__lfn Multe grasias.
__label__lfn Me ave du fias.
__label__lfn Judi es intelijente.
__label__lfn Bonveni a Japan.
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea longo la plaia.
__label__lfn Me ia nase a 22 janero 1933.
__label__lfn Me trova un consola en sua parolas.
__label__lfn Cual es la longia de la Ponte Arco de Sielo?
__label__lfn Tu es triste.
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea longo la rieta.
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea sirca la boteca de sofas.
__label__lfn La can dormi.
__label__lfn Do es Jim?
__label__lfn Me ia vive en felisia.
__label__lfn Tu es nervosa.
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea en la bosceta.
__label__lfn Cual es esta?
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea en la site.
__label__lfn El ave du fias.
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea sirca la boteca de zucar.
__label__lfn Los ave fias jemelo.
__label__lfn La mea sore es multe intelijente.
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea longo la strada.
__label__lfn La comeda deveni fria.
__label__lfn Do es la sala 105?
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea en la vileta.
__label__lfn La idea es ce tu canta.
__label__lfn Vos es nervosa.
__label__lfn Mone es un bon servor ma un mal senior.
__label__lfn Joan core en la site.
__label__lfn Los ave du fias.
__label__lfn Maria es ativa.
__label__lfn Bonveni a casa.
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea sirca la boteca de sponjas.
__label__lfn Per favore, dona la fatura.
__label__lfn Per favore.
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea en la urbe.
__label__lfn El ia ave un fia.
__label__lfn Cual es tua nom?
__label__lfn Los es silente.
__label__lfn Me ama tu.
__label__lfn La gato xasa la scural.
__label__lfn Per favore, aida mea fia.
__label__lfn La tre omes grande come.
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea sirca la bordel.
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea sirca la boteca de spadas.
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea sirca la boteca de sapones.
__label__lfn Tu es sempre en mea cor.
__label__lfn Computadores es macinas.
__label__lfn Lingua franca nova es libre per la usa de cadun.
__label__lfn Me pensa ce Tom es intelijente.
__label__lfn Maria es bela e intelijente.
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea sirca la castel.
__label__lfn La gato es felis.
__label__lfn Tu es tan amable.
__label__lfn No problem.
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea en la foresta.
__label__lfn La gato no gusta la can.
__label__lfn Nos ave du fias.
__label__lfn Tom ance ave demandas.
__label__lfn Taro ia compra un auto usada en la semana pasada.
__label__lfn Estas aspeta bela.
__label__lfn Encantada!
__label__lfn Mea fia usa aparato dental.
__label__lfn Do es meа auto?
__label__lfn Me ave un fia.
__label__lfn Es triste.
__label__lfn La libro es aora disponable.
__label__lfn Tu no ia nesesa come rapida.
__label__lfn Cual es tuа recorda prima de enfantia?
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea sirca la boteca de sombreros.
__label__lfn Sol e pluve, arco de sielo.
__label__lfn Me va come un ovo de un sentenio.
__label__lfn Cuanto esta custa?
__label__lfn Vos es triste.
__label__lfn Bonveni a la enferno!
__label__lfn La xico gusta pasea sirca la boteca de seso.
__label__lfn La xica gusta la can.
__label__lfn Trae la tua fia.
__label__lfn No tota muslimes es arabis.
__label__lfn Me comensa aprende lingua franca nova.
__label__lfn La arco de sielo es colorosa.
__label__lfn Nosа taxe es reconstrui la mur.
__label__lfn La xica gusta la musica.
__label__lfn La aira pare umida.
__label__lfn El ave tre fias.
__label__lfn La colores vidable en la arco de sielo es roja, orania, jala, verde, blu, purpur, e violeta.
__label__lfn La plu de la consonantes es pronunsiada como en engles.
__label__lfn Janero, febrero, marto, april, maio, junio, julio, agosto, setembre, otobre, novembre, e desembre es la des-du menses de la anio.
__label__lfn Lingua franca nova es un lingua aidante internasional creada par Dr. C. George Boeree e perfetida par multe suportores de la lingua.
__label__lfn A media viaja de esta vive, me ia trova me en un jungla oscur, car me ia perde la strada coreta.
__label__lfn Portuges es un lingua roman, parlada la plu parte en Portugal, Brasil, Angola, e Mosambic.
__label__lfn Boeree ia comensa labora a lfn en 1965, con la gol de crea un lingua simple. El ia es inspirada par leje sur lingua franca, un pijin usada en la mar Mediteranean en sentenios pasada.
__label__vo Hiel Marlon Brando (Jr.) (1924 tobul 3 - 2004 yulul 1) äbinom dramatan Lamerikänik, kel ägetom premi Kadäma Lekanas e Nolavas Biomagodemikas, e kela vob ätegon tumyeli plu lafiki. Palelogom fa mödikans as bal dramatanas flunilabikün jenotema biomagodemas. El Brando sevädom ledino kodü rouls omik pö biomagodems: A Streetcar Named Desire (= Träm „Desir“ Panemöl) ed On the Waterfront (= Su Vatajol), fa hiel Elia Kazan pädileköls primü degyel 1950, äsi kodü rouls: Vito Corleone (me kel ägetom premi Kadäma) pö The Godfather (= Spönan) e konulan: Walter E. Kurtz pö Apocalypse Now (= Paokalüp Anu), bofiks fa hiel Francis Ford Coppola pädileköls ün degyel 1970. El Brando äbinom i jäfidan pö mufs bolitik, vü kels Sifagitätamuf e Lindiyanamuf Lamerikäniks. Pänemom as folidan vü histelans veütikün jenotema fa Biomagodemastitod Lamerikänik. Moteds ün 1924 Deadams ün 2004 Dramatans Lamerikänik Yegeds vipabik
__label__vo Hiel Josef Fischer äbinom Volapükan in Augsburg (Deutän). Literat Spielmann, Sigmund. 1887. Volapük-Almanach für 1888, verfasst von Sigmund Spielmann. I. Jahrgang. Lekaled volapüka plo yel balmil jöltum jölsejöl, pelautöl fa Spielmann Sigmund. Yelüp balid. Leipzig: Mayer. (Vödem rigädik.) Fischer, Josef Fischer, Josef
__label__vo Cividate al Piano binon zif in topäd: Lombardän, in Litaliyän. Cividate al Piano topon videtü 45° 33’ N e lunetü 9° 49’ L. Sürfat ela Cividate al Piano binon mö 9 km². Cividate al Piano labon belödanis 4 882 (2001). Zifs in Lombardän Zifs Zifs in Litaliyän
__label__vo Doubs binon zif in ziläk: Doubs, in topäd: Franche-Comté, in Fransän. Doubs topon videtü 46°55’ 39’’ N e lunetü 6°21’ 3’’ L. Sürfat ela Doubs binon mö 8,94 km². Doubs labon belödanis 2 266 (1999). Zifs in Doubs Zifs Zifs in Fransän
__label__vo Montélimar binon zif in ziläk: Drôme, in topäd: Rhône-Alpes], in Fransän. Montélimar topon videtü 44°33’ 29’’ N e lunetü 4°45’ 3’’ L. Sürfat ela Montélimar binon mö 46,81 km². Montélimar labon belödanis 35 988 (2009). Montelimar Montelimar Montelimar
__label__vo Hiel Franz Egenieff (pemotöl tü 1874 mayul 31 in Niederwalluf as: Marian Eberhard Franz Emil von Kleydorff – edeadöl tü 1949 yunul 11 in Gmund am Tegernsee) äbinom filmadramatan e kanitan lopik Deutänik. Äbinom son militagenerala: Emil zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Berleburg. Yüms plödik su IMDb (in Linglänapük) su Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1874 Deadams ün 1949 Dramatans Deutänik Kanitans Deutänik
__label__vo Hiel Stef Gronsveld (pemotöl tü 1996 yanul 11 in Delft) binom futaglöpädan Nedänik, kel pledon in futaglöpädaklub: FC Dordrecht. Yüms plödik in WorldFootball.net in Soccerway Moteds ün 1996 Futaglöpädans Nedänik Futaglöpädans lafabetik
__label__vo Bollendorf binon zif in fedalän: Rinän⸗Palzän, in Deutän. Bollendorf topon videtü 49°51’ N e lunetü 6°21’ L. Sürfat ela Bollendorf binon mö 13,15 km². Bollendorf labon belödanis 1 604 (2006 dekul 31id).
__label__vo Dom Eliseu binon zif in tat: Pará, in Brasilän. Dom Eliseu topon videtü 4°17’ 6’’ S e lunetü 47°30’ 18’’ V. Sürfat ela Dom Eliseu binon mö 5 267,514 km². Dom Eliseu labon belödanis 50 739 (2005). Zifs in Pará Zifs Zifs in Brasilän
__label__vo Hiel Wilfried Hermann August Seyferth (pemotöl tü 1908 prilul 21 in Darmstadt – edeadöl tü 1954 tobul 9 in Zeilsheim) äbinom filma⸗ e teatadramatan Deutänik. Yüms plödik su IMDb (in Linglänapük) su Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1908 Deadams ün 1954 Dramatans Deutänik
__label__vo Neustrelitz binon zif in fedalän: Mäklänburgän⸗Vesüdapomerän, in Deutän. Neustrelitz topon videtü 53°21’ N e lunetü 13°3’ L. Sürfat ela Neustrelitz binon mö 138,15 km². Neustrelitz labon belödanis 22 152 (2006 dekul 31id).
__label__vo Hiel Jerzy Ryszard Schejbal (pämotöl tü 1946 novul 7 in Nowy Sącz) binom filmota⸗, teata⸗ ä televidadramatan Polänik. Yüms plödik pö el IMDb (in Linglänapük) pö el FilmPolski.pl (in Polänapük) pö el Filmweb (in Polänapük) Moteds ün 1946 Dramatans Polänik
__label__vo Jiel Claudia Eisinger (pemotöl tü 1984 setul 22 in Berlin) binof filma⸗, teata⸗ e televidadramatan Deutänik. Yüms plödik su IMDb (in Linglänapük) su Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1984 Dramatans Deutänik
__label__vo Itaboraí binon zif in tat: Rio de Janeiro, in Brasilän. Itaboraí topon videtü 22°44’ 51’’ S e lunetü 42°51’ 21’’ V. Sürfat ela Itaboraí binon mö 424,219 km². Itaboraí labon belödanis 210 000 (2005). Itaborai Itaborai Itaborai
__label__vo El Balatam Yuropik (BY) binon bolitik e konömavik balatam de 27 liman läns kel pladön in Yurop. Balatam Yuropik labön sürfat de 4,475,757 km² e labon belödanis 512 596 403 (2018). De facto cifazif Balatama Yuropik binon Brussel (Belgän). Balatam Yuropik koböfik pefünöl ün 1993 novul 1, stütü Maastricht Baläd pedispenöl in Maastricht (Nedän), tü 1992 febul 7. Yüms plödik Pad calofik Dail Yuropik Komit Yuropik Balatam Yuropik in Sikloped Britannica Balatam Yuropik
__label__vo Hiel Adolf Gondrell (pemotöl tü 1902 yulul 1 in München as: Adolf Grell – edeadöl tü 1954 yanul 13 id in München) äbinom filma⸗ e teatadramatan Deutänik. Yüms plödik su IMDb (in Linglänapük) su Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1902 Deadams ün 1954 Dramatans Deutänik
__label__vo Hiel W. A. Seret äbinom Volapükan Linglänik (Skotänik). Lautots 1885. Grammar of Volapük: The language of the world. For all speakers of the English language. Translated and published with the consent of the Inventor, Yohann Martin Schleyer. Glasgow: Mackenzie. (Dab. 2id, lölöfiko pärevidöl e pävotüköl, päpübon ün 1887: Glasgow: Murray, London: Whittacker.) Literat Haupenthal, Reinhard. 1982. Volapük-Bibliographie. Hildesheim, Zürich, New York: Georg Olms Verlag. (Päpüböl kobü dabükot nulik ela Volapük die Weltsprache ela Schleyer.) Kniele, Rupert. 1889. Das erste Jahrzehnt der Weltsprache Volapük. Verlag von A. Schoy, Buchhandlung, Ueberlingen a. B. (Dönu päpübon ün 1984 fa Reinhard Haupenthal, Saarbrücken: Editions Iltis.) (Vödem rigädik, ma dabükot balid). Spielmann, Sigmund. 1887. Volapük-Almanach für 1888, verfasst von Sigmund Spielmann. I. Jahrgang. Lekaled volapüka plo yel balmil jöltum jölsejöl, pelautöl fa Spielmann Sigmund. Yelüp balid. Leipzig: Mayer. (Vödem rigädik.) Seret, W. A. Seret, W. A.
__label__vo Daleks binon konot telid se säsun balid de televidalekoned „Dokan Kim". Päbroadon vü 1963 dekul 21 e 1964 febul 1, labü näijenots vel. Pälauton fa Terry Nation, e Dokan päpledom fa William Hartnell. Näijenots panemons: Planet deadik Lailifans Skeap Lüköpam Letäv Drän Sav Dramatans Dokan Kim
__label__vo Montlouis-sur-Loire binon zif in ziläk: Indre-et-Loire, in topäd: Centre, in Fransän. Montlouis-sur-Loire topon videtü 47°23’ 21’’ N e lunetü 0°49’ 41’’ L. Sürfat ela Montlouis-sur-Loire binon mö 24,55 km². Montlouis-sur-Loire labon belödanis 9 657 (1999). Zifs in Indre-et-Loire Zifs Zifs in Fransän
__label__vo Jiel Margit Nünke (pemotöl tü 1930 novul 15 in Szczecin, Polän – edeadöl tü 2015 yanul 10 in München) äbinof filma⸗ e televidadramatan; e vogädijonan Deutänik. Yüms plödik su IMDb (in Linglänapük) su Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1930 Deadams ün 2015 Dramatans Deutänik Vogädijonans Deutänik
__label__vo Hiel Maximilian Paul "Max" Devrient (pemotöl tü 1857 dekul 12 in Hannover – edeadöl tü 1929 yunul 14 in Chur, Jveizän) äbinom filma⸗ e teatadramatan Deutänik. Äbinom son dramatana: Karl August Devrient. Yüms plödik su IMDb (in Linglänapük) su Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1857 Deadams ün 1929 Dramatans Deutänik
__label__vo Pescasseroli binon zif in topäd: Abruzzo, in Litaliyän. Pescasseroli topon videtü 41° 48’ N e lunetü 13° 47’ L. Sürfat ela Pescasseroli binon mö 92,35 km². Pescasseroli labon belödanis 2 225 (2001). Zifs in Abruzzo Zifs Zifs in Litaliyän
__label__vo Hiel James Gan Teik Chai (pämotöl tü 1983 febul 5 in Kedah – ädeadöl tü 2023 gustul 5 in Surabaya, Lindäna-Seänuäns) äbinom el badminton pledan Malaysiyänik. Noets Yüms plödik pö el BWF (in Linglänapük) Moteds ün 1983 Deadams ün 2023 Els badminton pledans Malaysiyänik
__label__vo Jiel Kathleen Nord (pemotöl tü 1965 dekul 26 in Magdeburg – edeadöl tü 2022 febul 24 in Elmshorn) äbinof sviman Deutänik. Ägetof köni goldik su Lepleds Lümpik yela 1988 (200 m mageta pabik). Noets Yüms plödik su Olympedia (in Linglänapük) su FINA (in Linglänapük) Moteds ün 1965 Deadams ün 2022 Svimans Deutänik
__label__vo Jiel Liv Lisa Fries (pemotöl tü 1990 tobul 31 in Berlin) binof filma⸗ e televidadramatan Deutänik. Yüms plödik su IMDb (in Linglänapük) su Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1990 Dramatans Deutänik
__label__vo Cícero Dantas binon zif in tat: Bahia, in Brasilän. Cícero Dantas topon videtü 10°36’ 0’’ S e lunetü 38°22’ 58’’ V. Sürfat ela Cícero Dantas binon mö 658,94 km². Cícero Dantas labon belödanis 33 656 (2005). Cicero Dantas Cicero Dantas Cicero Dantas
__label__vo Hiel Hans Noever (pemotöl tü 1928 mayul 10 in Krefeld) binom filma⸗ e televidadramatan, filmotirejidan e filmotalibrätan Deutänik. Yüms plödik su IMDb (in Linglänapük) su Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1928 Dramatans Deutänik Rejidans Deutänik Filmotalibrätans Deutänik
__label__vo Chubut binon bal provinas 23 Repüblika Largäntänik. Labon belödanis 413 237 (2001). Cifazif ela Chubut binon Rawson. Sürfat ela Chubut binon mö 224 686 km²; lödanadensit binon mö 1,8 mens a km². Padilon ad ziläks 15. Votükam lätik stabalona provinik äjenon yelü 1994. Dilam guverik Ziläks provina at binons: Cushamen Escalante Florentino Ameghino Futaleufú Gaiman Gastre Languiñeo Mártires Paso de Indios Rawson Río Senguer Sarmiento Tehuelches Telsen Biedma Flumeds veütikün Chubut Río Senguerr Zifs veütikün Comodoro Rivadavia Esquel Gaiman Puerto Rawson Sarmiento Trelew Provins Largäntäna
__label__vo Hiel Edward Allen Harris (pemotöl tü 1950 novul 28 in Englewood, New Jersey) binom dramatan, rejidan, filmotalibrätan e biomagodemiprodan Lamerikänik, sevädik ad roul as Christof in filmot: Truman Show (1998). Yüms plödik in IMDb in Internet Broadway Database Moteds ün 1950 Dramatans Lamerikänik Rejidans Lamerikänik Filmotalibrätans Lamerikänik Biomagodemiprodans Lamerikänik
__label__vo Jiel Eva Anna Kotthaus (pemotöl tü 1932 mayul 19 in Düsseldorf – edeadöl tü 2020 prilul 22) äbinof filma⸗, televida⸗ e teatadramatan Deutänik. Yüms plödik su IMDb (in Linglänapük) su Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1932 Deadams ün 2020 Dramatans Deutänik
__label__vo Longages binon zif in ziläk: Haute-Garonne, in topäd: Midi-Pyrénées, in Fransän. Longages topon videtü 43°21’ 21’’ N e lunetü 1°14’ 27’’ L. Sürfat ela Longages binon mö 21,42 km². Longages labon belödanis 1 899 (1999). Zifs in Haute-Garonne Zifs Zifs in Fransän
__label__vo Hiel Stanisław Wyszyński (pemotöl tü 1932 yanul 12 in Vilnius, Lietuvän – edeadöl tü 2012 dekul 12 in Warszawa) äbinom dramatan bioskopik e teatöpik Polänik. Yüms plödik Stanisław Wyszyński in IMDb Stanisław Wyszyński in FilmPolski.pl Stanisław Wyszyński in Filmweb Moteds ün 1932 Deadams ün 2012 Dramatans Polänik
__label__vo Dabinons: Bessemer: zif in tat: Alabama, in Lamerikän. Bessemer: zif in tat: Michigan, in Lamerikän. Bessemer: zif in tat: Pensülvän, in Lamerikän. Bessemer: zif in tat: Vesüda⸗Virginän, in Lamerikän.
__label__vo Hiel Anatoliy Mihaylovic Scukin (rusänapüko: Анатолий Михайлович Щукин; 1916 dekul 7 in Moskva — 1983 mayul 29 in Moskva) äbinom teata⸗ e filmadramatan Rusänik. Yüms plödik in IMDb Deadams ün 1983 Dramatans Rusänik Moteds ün 1916
__label__vo Spello binon zif in topäd: Lumbriyän, in Litaliyän. Spello topon videtü 42° 59’ N e lunetü 12° 40’ L. Sürfat ela Spello binon mö 61 km². Spello labon belödanis 8 593 (2001). Zifs in Lumbriyän Zifs Zifs in Litaliyän
__label__vo Tatak stiravikanas (Attack of the Cybermen) binon konot balid se säsun teldegtelid de televidalekoned „Dokan Kim". Päbroadon ün 1985, vü yanul 5 ed yanul 12, labü näijenots tel. Pälauton fa Paula Moore, e Dokan päpledom fa Colin Baker. Dokan Kim
__label__vo Hiel Mauricio Ezequiel Quiroga (pemotöl tü 1992 mäzul 13 in San Luis – edeadöl tü 2022 yunul 20 in Juana Koslay) äbinom saikulan Largäntänik. Noets Yüms plödik su Pro Cycling Stats (in Linglänapük) su Cycling Archives (in Linglänapük) Moteds ün 1992 Deadams ün 2022 Saikulans Largäntänik
__label__vo Hiel Eberhard Esche (pemotöl tü 1933 tobul 25 in Leipzig – edeadöl tü 2006 mayul 15 in Berlin) äbinom filma⸗, televida⸗ e teatadramatan Deutänik. Yüms plödik su IMDb (in Linglänapük) su Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1933 Deadams ün 2006 Dramatans Deutänik
__label__vo Campo Verde binon zif in tat: Mato Grosso, in Brasilän. Campo Verde topon videtü 15°32’ 49’’ S e lunetü 55°10’ 8’’ V. Sürfat ela Campo Verde binon mö 4 794,55 km². Campo Verde labon belödanis 25 533 (2005). Zifs in Mato Grosso Zifs Zifs in Brasilän
__label__vo Tikäliblegükam (Mindwarp) binon konot telid se säsun teldegkilid de televidalekoned „Dokan Kim". Päbroadon ün 1986, vü tobul 4 e tobul 25, labü näijenots fol. Pälauton fa Philip Martin, e Dokan päpledom fa Colin Baker. Säsun at binon konot lunik bal, panemü „Cödäd Timalorda" (The Trial of a Timelord). Dokan Kim
__label__vo Varades binon zif in ziläk: Loire-Atlantique, in topäd: Pays de la Loire, in Fransän. Varades topon videtü 47°23’ 7’’ N e lunetü 1°1’ 44’’ V. Sürfat ela Varades binon mö 45,82 km². Varades labon belödanis 3 190 (1999). Zifs in Loire-Atlantique Zifs Zifs in Fransän
__label__vo Cervione binon zif in ziläk: Haute-Corse, su nisul: Korsikeän, in Fransän. Cervione topon videtü 42°19’ 57’’ N e lunetü 9°29’ 32’’ L. Sürfat ela Cervione binon mö 11,45 km². Cervione labon belödanis 1 452 (1999). Zifs in Haute-Corse Zifs Zifs in Fransän
__label__vo Hiel Roland Renner (pämotöl tü yel 1951 in München) binom filmota⸗, televida⸗ ä teatadramatan Deutänik. Yüms plödik pö el IMDb (in Linglänapük) pö el Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1951 Dramatans Deutänik
__label__vo Hiel Ryan Dominic Bertrand (1989 Gustul 5, Southwark) binom futaglöpädan Linglänik e futaglöpädaklub Southampton F.C.. Yüms Plödik Ryan Bertrand in National Football Teams Futaglöpädans lafabetik Futaglöpädans Linglänik Moteds ün 1989
__label__vo Hiel Arthur Renier (u Rennier) äbinom Volapükan Belgänik, ä tradutan tidodema lölifik ela Kerckhoffs ini Nedänapük. Lautots 1887. Grondbeginselen van Volapük naar de laatste verbeteringen van A. Kerckhoffs. Antwerpen: Brouwers. (Dabükot 2id: 1887; ... Dabükot 10id: 1887) {Tradutod ela Premiers éléments de Volapük hiela Kerckhoffs.) Literat Haupenthal, Reinhard. 1982. Volapük-Bibliographie. Hildesheim, Zürich, New York: Georg Olms Verlag. (Päpüböl kobü dabükot nulik ela Volapük die Weltsprache ela Schleyer.) Kniele, Rupert. 1889. Das erste Jahrzehnt der Weltsprache Volapük. Verlag von A. Schoy, Buchhandlung, Ueberlingen a. B. (Dönu päpübon ün 1984 fa Reinhard Haupenthal, Saarbrücken: Editions Iltis.) (Vödem rigädik, ma dabükot balid). Spielmann, Sigmund. 1887. Volapük-Almanach für 1888, verfasst von Sigmund Spielmann. I. Jahrgang. Lekaled volapüka plo yel balmil jöltum jölsejöl, pelautöl fa Spielmann Sigmund. Yelüp balid. Leipzig: Mayer. (Vödem rigädik.) Renier, Arthur Renier, Arthur
__label__vo Dabinons: Denton: zif in tat: Nebraska, in Lamerikän. Denton: zif in tat: North Carolina, in Lamerikän. Denton: zif in tat: Texas, in Lamerikän. Denton: zif in tat: Montana, in Lamerikän. Denton: zif in tat: Kansas, in Lamerikän. Denton: zif in tat: Georgän, in Lamerikän. Denton: zif in tat: Maryland, in Lamerikän.
__label__vo Hiel Emil von Neumann äbinom Volapükan Lösteränik. Literat Spielmann, Sigmund. 1887. Volapük-Almanach für 1888, verfasst von Sigmund Spielmann. I. Jahrgang. Lekaled volapüka plo yel balmil jöltum jölsejöl, pelautöl fa Spielmann Sigmund. Yelüp balid. Leipzig: Mayer. (Vödem rigädik.) Neumann, Emil von Neumann, Emil von
__label__vo Jiel Ebba Helena Pauli (1873 yunul 12 in Västerhaninge - 1941 yulul 28 in Stockholm) äbinof lautan Svedänik änitedälöl in dins e säkäds sogädiks. Äbinof daut sekretana reiganefa Svedänik: Carl Gustav Pauli e jiela Emma Charlotta Swartling. Famül: Pauli binon noubik, e licinon de Litaliyän. Jiel Ebba Pauli pädavälof as sekretan tefü jel pöfikanas. Äbinof fünan Zänakluba pro Vob Sogädik e Stitoda hiela Lucas: Salüdan. Kobü hiel Natanael Beskow ästitof tü 1912 novul 26 „lödöpi“ (hemgård) balid Svedäna: Birkagården. Lautots Kamp eller resignation (Komip u sufod, 1937) Eremiten och andra berättelser (Härmit e konots votik, 1919-1923) Moteds ün 1873 Deadams ün 1941 Lautans Svedänik
__label__vo Hiel Edoardo Vergani (pemotöl tü 2001 febul 6 in Segrate) binom futaglöpädan Litaliyänik, kel pledon in futaglöpädaklub: U.S. Salernitana 1919. Yüms plödik su Soccerway su WorldFootball.net Moteds ün 2001 Futaglöpädans Litaliyänik Futaglöpädans lafabetik
__label__vo Jiel M. E. C. Kramers äbinof Volapükan in Oudenbosch, Nedän, kel pämäniotof in gased: Volapükel Nedänik as tidan Volapüka. Literat Spielmann, Sigmund. 1887. Volapük-Almanach für 1888, verfasst von Sigmund Spielmann. I. Jahrgang. Lekaled volapüka plo yel balmil jöltum jölsejöl, pelautöl fa Spielmann Sigmund. Yelüp balid. Leipzig: Mayer. (Vödem rigädik.) 1888. Lijst der Tidels en Löpitidels Vpa in Nederland. Volapükel Nedänik, nüm: 3 (tiädü Volapükan Nedänik), pad: 5. (Vödem rigädik.) Kramers, M. F. C. Kramers, M. F. C. Kramers, M. F. C.
__label__vo Jiel Doe Avedon (pemotöl tü 1925 prilul 7 in Old Westbury as Dorcas Marie Nowell – edeadöl tü 2011 dekul 18 in Encino, Los Angeles) äbinof dramatan e vogädijonan Lamerikänik. Yüms plödik in IMDb in Internet Broadway Database Moteds ün 1925 Deadams ün 2011 Dramatans Lamerikänik Vogädijonans Lamerikänik
__label__vo Hiel Smith e jiel Jones (Smith and Jones) binon näijenot balid se säsun nulik kilid de televidalekoned „Dokan Kim". Pälauton fa Russell T Davies, e päbroadon tü 2007 mäzul 31. Dokan päpledom fa David Tennant. Dokan Kim
__label__vo Jiel Alysson Paradis (pämotöl as Alison Paradis; 1984 mayul 29 in Paris) binof dramatan Fransänik. Binof jiblod kanitana: Vanessa Paradis. Yüms plödik Alysson Paradis su "IMDb" Moteds ün 1984 Dramatans Fransänik
__label__vo Yanul 20 binon del 20id yela ma kaled hiela Gregorius. Dabinons nog dels 345 (346 in vüpladotayels) jü fin yela. Jenots veütik Volapük Moteds 1920: hiel Federico Fellini: biomagodemidilekan Litaliyänik (äd. ün 1993). Volapükans Deadams Volapükans Zäladels 2
__label__vo Jiel Grace Alele-Williams (pemotöl tü 1932 dekul 16 in Warri – edeadöl tü 2022 mäzul 25 in Lagos) äbinof matematan e tidan niverik Nigeriyänik. Noets Yüms plödik su MacTutor (in Linglänapük) Moteds ün 1932 Deadams ün 2022 Matematans Nigeriyänik Tidans Nigeriyänik
__label__vo Hiel Roman Andreyevic Karzev (rusänapüko: Роман Андреевич Карцев; pemotöl tü 1939 mayul 20 in Odesa – edeadöl tü 2018 tobul 2 in Moskva) äbinom dramatan teatöpik e bioskopik Rusänik. Yüms plödik Roman Karzev in IMDb Deadams ün 2018 Dramatans Rusänik Moteds ün 1939
__label__vo Jiel Thelma Buabeng (pemotöl tü 1981 mäzul 31 in Ganän) binof filma⸗, teata⸗ e televidadramatan Deutänik. Yüms plödik Pad calofik su IMDb (in Linglänapük) su Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1981 Dramatans Deutänik
__label__vo Sigillo binon zif in topäd: Lumbriyän, in Litaliyän. Sigillo topon videtü 43° 19’ N e lunetü 12° 44’ L. Sürfat ela Sigillo binon mö 26 km². Sigillo labon belödanis 2 461 (2001). Zifs in Lumbriyän Zifs Zifs in Litaliyän
__label__vo Chioggia binon zif in topäd: Veneto, in Litaliyän. Chioggia topon videtü 45° 13’ N e lunetü 12° 17’ L. Sürfat ela Chioggia binon mö 185 km². Chioggia labon belödanis 51 336 (2001). Zifs in Veneto Zifs Zifs in Litaliyän
__label__vo Hiel José Touré (pemotöl tü 1961 prilul 24 in Nancy) binom futaglöpädan Fransänik. Yüms plödik in National Football Teams in FootballDatabase.eu Moteds ün 1961 Futaglöpädans Fransänik Futaglöpädans lafabetik
__label__vo Jiel Maya Lauterbach (pemotöl tü 2002 yulul 3) binof filma⸗ e televidadramatan Deutänik. Binof daut dramatana: Heiner Lauterbach. Yüms plödik su IMDb (in Linglänapük) su Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 2002 Dramatans Deutänik
__label__vo Itaperuna binon zif in tat: Rio de Janeiro, in Brasilän. Itaperuna topon videtü 21°12’ 18’’ S e lunetü 41°53’ 16’’ V. Sürfat ela Itaperuna binon mö 1 105,566 km². Itaperuna labon belödanis 93 165 (2005). Zifs in Rio de Janeiro Zifs Zifs in Brasilän
__label__vo Fretin binon zif in ziläk: Nord, in topäd: Nord-Pas-de-Calais, in Fransän. Fretin topon videtü 50°33’ 29’’ N e lunetü 3°8’ 6’’ L. Sürfat ela Fretin binon mö 13,17 km². Fretin labon belödanis 2 997 (1999). Zifs in Nord Zifs Zifs in Fransän
__label__vo Jiel Doris Egbring-Kahn (pemotöl tü yel 1926 in Münster, Nolüdarinän⸗Vesfalän – edeadöl tü 2016 novul 13) äbinof filma⸗, televida⸗ e teatadramatan Deutänik. Yüms plödik su IMDb (in Linglänapük) su Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1926 Deadams ün 2016 Dramatans Deutänik
__label__vo Finhan binon zif in ziläk: Tarn-et-Garonne, in topäd: Midi-Pyrénées, in Fransän. Sürfat ela Finhan binon mö 11,48 km². Finhan labon belödanis 934 (1999). Zifs in Tarn-et-Garonne Zifs Zifs in Fransän
__label__vo Contamine-sur-Arve binon zif in ziläk: Haute-Savoie, in topäd: Rhône-Alpes, in Fransän. Sürfat ela Contamine-sur-Arve binon mö 6,9 km². Contamine-sur-Arve labon belödanis 1 343 (1999). Zifs in Haute-Savoie Zifs Zifs in Fransän
__label__vo Hiel Kristófer Ingi Kristinsson (pemotöl tü 1999 prilul 7 in Garðabær) binom futaglöpädan Lisladeänik, kel pledon in futaglöpädaklub: Grenoble Foot 38 (FRA). Yüms plödik in UEFA in Soccerway Moteds ün 1999 Futaglöpädans Lisladeänik Futaglöpädans lafabetik
__label__vo Hiel Anton Andreas Schelkopf (pemotöl tü 1914 prilul 28 in München – edeadöl tü 1975 mayul 19 in Starnberg) äbinom biomagodemiprodan e lanavan Deutänik. Yüms plödik su IMDb (in Linglänapük) su Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1914 Deadams ün 1975 Biomagodemiprodans Deutänik Lanavans Deutänik
__label__vo Hiel Vladimir Leonidovic Gulyayev (rusänapüko: Владимир Леонидович Гуляев; 1924 tobul 30 in Sverdlovsk – 1997 novul 3 in Moskva) äbinom dramatan teatöpik e bioskopik Rusänik. Yüms plödik Vladimir Gulyayev in IMDb Deadams ün 1997 Dramatans Rusänik Moteds ün 1924
__label__vo Le Plessis-Grammoire binon zif in ziläk: Maine-et-Loire, in topäd: Pays de la Loire, in Fransän. Le Plessis-Grammoire topon videtü 47°30’ 4’’ N e lunetü 0°25’ 42’’ V. Sürfat ela Le Plessis-Grammoire binon mö 9,14 km². Le Plessis-Grammoire labon belödanis 2 013 (1999). Zifs in Maine-et-Loire Zifs Zifs in Fransän
__label__vo Combloux binon zif in ziläk: Haute-Savoie, in topäd: Rhône-Alpes, in Fransän. Sürfat ela Combloux binon mö 17,2 km². Combloux labon belödanis 1 976 (1999). Zifs in Haute-Savoie Zifs Zifs in Fransän
__label__vo Jiel Monika Krzywkowska (pämotöl tü 1973 febul 23 in Warszawa) binof filmota⸗, teata⸗ ä televidadramatan Polänik. Yüms plödik pö el IMDb (in Linglänapük) pö el FilmPolski.pl (in Polänapük) pö el Filmweb (in Polänapük) Moteds ün 1973 Dramatans Polänik
__label__vo Jiel Joanna Honorata Brodzik (pemotöl tü 1973 yanul 11 in Krosno Odrzańskie) binof dramatan Polänik. Yüms plödik Joanna Brodzik su "IMDb" Joanna Brodzik su FilmPolski.pl Joanna Brodzik su "Filmweb" Moteds ün 1973 Dramatans Polänik
__label__vo Jiel Barbara Rütting (pemotöl tü 1927 novul 21 in Berlin as: Waltraut Irmgard Goltz – edeadöl tü 2020 mäzul 28 in Marktheidenfeld) äbinof filmota⸗ e televidadramatan, lautan e bolitan Deutänik. Yüms plödik pö el IMDb (in Linglänapük) pö el Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1927 Deadams ün 2020 Dramatans Deutänik Lautans Deutänik Bolitans Deutänik
__label__vo Casaluce binon zif in topäd: Campania, in Litaliyän. Casaluce topon videtü 41° ’ N e lunetü 14° 12’ L. Sürfat ela Casaluce binon mö 9 km². Casaluce labon belödanis 9 782 (2001). Zifs in Campania Zifs Zifs in Litaliyän
__label__vo Jiel Ilona Grandke (pämotöl tü 1943 setul 24 in Wrocław, Polän) binof filmota⸗, teata⸗, vöga⸗ ä televidadramatan; ä kanitan Deutänik. Yüms plödik pö el IMDb (in Linglänapük) pö el Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1943 Dramatans Deutänik Kanitans Deutänik
__label__vo Plougasnou binon zif in ziläk: Finistère, in topäd: Bretagne, in Fransän. Plougasnou topon videtü 48°41’ 47’’ N e lunetü 3°47’ 17’’ V. Sürfat ela Plougasnou binon mö 33,94 km². Plougasnou labon belödanis 3 393 (1999). Zifs in Finistère Zifs Zifs in Fransän
__label__vo Jiel Ute Boy-Behrend (pämotöl tü 1938 dekul 30 in Berlin – ädeadöl tü 2014 setul 2) äbinof filmota⸗, televida⸗ ä teatadramatan Deutänik. Yüms plödik pö el IMDb (in Linglänapük) pö el Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1938 Deadams ün 2014 Dramatans Deutänik
__label__vo Jiel Agata Kulesza-Figurska (pemotöl tü 1971 setul 27 in Szczecin) binof dramatan bioskopik, televidik, vögik e teatöpik Polänik. Yüms plödik in IMDb in FilmPolski.pl in Filmweb Moteds ün 1971 Dramatans Polänik
__label__vo Guardiagrele binon zif in topäd: Abruzzo, in Litaliyän. Guardiagrele topon videtü 42° 12’ N e lunetü 14° 13’ L. Sürfat ela Guardiagrele binon mö 56 km². Guardiagrele labon belödanis 9 662 (2001). Zifs in Abruzzo Zifs Zifs in Litaliyän
__label__vo Hiel Benjamin Géza Affleck-Boldt (1972 gustul 15 in Berkeley) binom dramatan, rejidan e filmotalibrätan Lamerikänik. Yüms plödik Ben Affleck in IMDb Moteds ün 1972 Dramatans Lamerikänik Rejidans Lamerikänik Filmotalibrätans Lamerikänik
__label__vo Talmont-Saint-Hilaire binon zif in ziläk: Vendée, in topäd: Pays de la Loire, in Fransän. Sürfat ela Talmont-Saint-Hilaire binon mö 89,53 km². Talmont-Saint-Hilaire labon belödanis 5 363 (1999). Zifs in Vendée Zifs Zifs in Fransän
__label__vo Hiel Jean Nichol (pemotöl tü 1944 dekul 8 in Windsor, Québec as: Louis Simoneau – edeadöl tü 2020 mayul 11) äbinom kanitan e kanitilautan Kanadänik. Labuns Jean Nichol sur scène (1970) Oh Lady Mary (1970) Sans toi (1971) Jean Nichol (1971) Pour vous (1973) Angélique (1974) Cette femme (1976) Disons-nous adieu (1978) 16 grands succès (1998) 24 chansons d'amour (1999) Noets Yüms plödik in Discogs Moteds ün 1944 Deadams ün 2020 Kanitans Kanadänik Kanitilautans Kanadänik
__label__vo Bad Ischl binon zif in fedalän: Oberösterreich, in Lösterän. Bad Ischl topon videtü 47° 43’ N e lunetü 13° 38’ L. Sürfat ela Bad Ischl binon mö 162,8 km². Bad Ischl labon belödanis 14 104 (2005). Zifs in Oberösterreich Zifs Zifs in Lösterän
__label__vo Hiel Lew Rywin (pemotöl tü 1945 novul 10 in Nizhnyeye Alkeyevo, Rusän) binom biomagodemiprodan e dramatan Polänik. Yüms plödik Lew Rywin in IMDb Lew Rywin in FilmPolski.pl Lew Rywin in Filmweb Moteds ün 1945 Biomagodemiprodans Polänik Dramatans Polänik
__label__vo Hiel Andrey Alekseyevic Petrov (rusänapüko: Андрей Алексеевич Петров; 1919 dekul 19 in Saratov — 1990 yulul 11 in Moskva) äbinom teata⸗ e filmadramatan Rusänik. Yüms plödik in IMDb Deadams ün 1990 Dramatans Rusänik Moteds ün 1919
__label__vo Hiel Leonid Ivanovic Gubanov (rusänapüko: Леонид Иванович Губанов; 1928 gustul 2 in Rübazkoye — 2004 febul 24 in Moskva) äbinom teata⸗ e filmadramatan Rusänik. Yüms plödik in IMDb Dramatans Rusänik Moteds ün 1928 Deadams ün 2004
__label__vo Hiel Thomas "Tom" Helmut Beck (pemotöl tü 1978 febul 26 in Nürnberg) binom dramatan bioskopik, teatöpik e televidik; e kanitan Deutänik. Labuns 2011: Superficial Animal 2012: Americanized 2013: Americanized Tour 2013 2014: Unplugged in Köln 2015: So wie es ist 2020: 4B Yüms plödik Pad calofik Tom Beck in IMDb Tom Beck in Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1978 Dramatans Deutänik Kanitans Deutänik
__label__vo Augusto Corrêa binon zif in tat: Pará, in Brasilän. Augusto Corrêa topon videtü 1°1’ 19’’ S e lunetü 46°38’ 42’’ V. Sürfat ela Augusto Corrêa binon mö 1 091,04 km². Augusto Corrêa labon belödanis 34 998 (2005). Augusto Correa Augusto Correa Augusto Correa
__label__vo Hiel José da Silva Teixeira (Yuropa-Portugänapüko: , Brasiläna-Portugänapüko: ) äbinom Volapükan Portugänik. Ägetom diplomi tidana Volapüka ün 1887. Lautots 1886. Methodo pratico de Volapük. Porto: Livraria Gutenberg. Peneds 1887. In Volapük: Gased bevünetik tedelik, nolik, literatik e gälodik, Nüm: 6, Pad: 55. (Vödem rigädik.) Literat Haupenthal, Reinhard. 1982. Volapük-Bibliographie. Hildesheim, Zürich, New York: Georg Olms Verlag. (Päpüböl kobü dabükot nulik ela Volapük die Weltsprache ela Schleyer.) Kniele, Rupert. 1889. Das erste Jahrzehnt der Weltsprache Volapük. Verlag von A. Schoy, Buchhandlung, Ueberlingen a. B. (Dönu päpübon ün 1984 fa Reinhard Haupenthal, Saarbrücken: Editions Iltis.) (Vödem rigädik, ma dabükot balid). Spielmann, Sigmund. 1887. Volapük-Almanach für 1888, verfasst von Sigmund Spielmann. I. Jahrgang. Lekaled volapüka plo yel balmil jöltum jölsejöl, pelautöl fa Spielmann Sigmund. Yelüp balid. Leipzig: Mayer. (Vödem rigädik.) Teixeira, José da Silva Teixeira, José da Silva
__label__vo Hiel Emanuele Severino (pemotöl tü 1929 febul 26 in Brescia - edeadöl tü 2020 yanul 17 id in Brescia) äbinom filosopan Litaliyänik. Noets Yüms plödik in Treccani (in Litaliyänapük) Moteds ün 1929 Deadams ün 2020 Filosopans Litaliyänik
__label__vo Eggersdorf binon zif in fedalän: Saxän⸗Lanhaltän, in Deutän. Eggersdorf topon videtü 51°58’ N e lunetü 11°41’ L. Taledav Sürfat ela Eggersdorf binon mö 5,55 km². Eggersdorf labon belödanis 1 240 (2006 dekul 31id). Jenav Tü 2008 yanul 1 Eggersdorf ävedon dil komota: Bördeland.
__label__vo Martinópolis binon zif in tat: São Paulo, in Brasilän. Martinópolis topon videtü 22°8’ 45’’ S e lunetü 51°10’ 15’’ V. Sürfat ela Martinópolis binon mö 1 253,15 km². Martinópolis labon belödanis 24 322 (2005). Martinopolis Martinopolis Martinopolis
__label__vo Irati binon zif in tat: Paraná, in Brasilän. Irati topon videtü 25°28’ 1’’ S e lunetü 50°39’ 3’’ V. Sürfat ela Irati binon mö 999,51 km². Irati labon belödanis 54 855 (2005). Zifs in Paraná Zifs Zifs in Brasilän
__label__vo Jiel Mariella Ahrens (pemotöl tü 1969 prilul 2 in Leningrad (Sankt-Peterburg), Rusän) binof dramatan bioskopik, teatöpik e televidik Deutänik. Yüms plödik Pad calofik in IMDb in Filmportal.de (in Deutänapük) Moteds ün 1969 Dramatans Deutänik
__label__vo Itapeva binon zif in tat: São Paulo, in Brasilän. Itapeva topon videtü 23°58’ 55’’ S e lunetü 48°52’ 33’’ V. Sürfat ela Itapeva binon mö 1 826,75 km². Itapeva labon belödanis 89 743 (2005). Zifs in São Paulo Zifs Zifs in Brasilän
__label__vo Ägolob us, bi ävilob.
__label__vo Düp kinid binos-li?
__label__vo Paris binon cifazif Fransäna.
__label__vo No kanob memön, kö äremob oni.
__label__vo Bib sagon obse, das sötobs löfön nilikünanis obik.
__label__vo Ämafobs dibi flumeda.
__label__vo Logob buki.
__label__vo Reidob buki.
__label__vo No sevobs omi.
__label__vo Nuf doma obik binon redik.
__label__vo Äreidob buki äneito.
__label__vo Kat epöjuton mugi.
__label__vo At binon glato.
__label__vo Plän hiela Tom äbinon tu komplitik.
__label__vo Takedolöd e dalilolöd!
__label__vo Faemol-li?
__label__vo Löfilol-li zifi?
__label__vo Cil äslipon su vüm mota onik.
__label__vo Kanitolös kaniti.
__label__vo Kikodo binols-li so lügik?
__label__vo Binob lefredik.
__label__vo Pos ereidol oni, gegivolöd buki obe.
__label__vo No vilob okgidükami. Vilob pläni.
__label__vo Dalob-li labön gasedi at?
__label__vo Gad binon föfü dom.
__label__vo Löfob oli, o lanan obik.
__label__vo Binof plitiälik.
__label__vo Binon-li et dog manik u vomik?
__label__vo Lefat obik pämotom ün 1920.
__label__vo Dalob-li säkön kiöpo vobol?
__label__vo Cilils luvokädons ven faemons.
__label__vo Mans tel seadöl su bam äbinons lamerikänik.
__label__vo No vilob golön lü bed.
__label__vo Gesag ofik no binon verätik.
__label__vo Kanom-li spikön Fransänapüki?
__label__vo No ägegivof obe mon obik.
__label__vo Leblimolöd bedi olik.
__label__vo Kisi etunol-li ko pen obik?
__label__vo Döls glünik nekölik slipoms foetiko.
__label__vo Bi tren no ästebedon por ob.
__label__vo Binon-li kat su stul u dis stul?
__label__vo Onifos odelo.
__label__vo Ad sagön verati, no binob fat olik.
__label__vo Dom binon koldik.
__label__vo Studan spikilon Linglänapüki.
__label__vo Cilil falons suvo.
__label__vo Spelobs, das fredol biologamoti.
__label__vo Labom blodis kil.
__label__vo Buk binon smalik.
__label__vo Dilolös reinajelömi obik.
__label__vo Buk binon vietik.
__label__vo Neai efidob fidi Tsyinänik.
__label__vo No memob, kö äremob oni.
__label__vo Ogivob oni ole.
__label__vo Gepenolös suniko.
__label__vo Kikodo binol-li so lügik?
__label__vo Sör omik no golof lü Lamerikän.
__label__vo Et binon tikamagot obik.
__label__vo Äbinos hitik ädelo.
__label__vo Löfob soli.
__label__vo No tädolöd obi.
__label__vo Lödob in Yokohama.
__label__vo Plidof vini.
__label__vo Äjedom pledadini omik.
__label__vo Hiel John lifom in New York.
__label__vo Kiöpo ägetol-li könädis bäldik et?
__label__vo Ziom obik vobom in bür at.
__label__vo Binom-li flen olik?
__label__vo Oyöbom ad logön oli.
__label__vo Kiöpo binon-li bukem?
__label__vo Binob gasediman Polänik.
__label__vo Tikods nekölik grünik slipons lezuniko.
__label__vo Memob vödi.
__label__vo Äremof vödabuki i.
__label__vo In Laustralän spikoy Linglänapuki.
__label__vo Kanob spikön Linglänapüki.
__label__vo Äkolkömom mani junik plitälik.
__label__vo Svimobs semanaedo in lak.
__label__vo Färmükolöd yani.
__label__vo Penob penedi.
__label__vo No löfilob oli plu.
__label__vo Kikodo studol-li?
__label__vo Mutol gesagön säki.
__label__vo Fransänapük paspikon in Fransän.
__label__vo Lavob namis obik.
__label__vo Labob bukis tel.
__label__vo Mutob-li studön?
__label__vo Pöjutons ravani.
__label__vo Cilil slipon su bed.
__label__vo Glun pategon fa tapäd bigik.
__label__vo Äkondötof vemo fopiko.
__label__vo Kikodo binor-li so lügik?
__label__vo Binom flen ofik.
__label__vo Löfob oli.
__label__vo Buk binon gretik.
__label__vo Tikob, binos gudik, das buks dabinons nog, ab ons slipöfikükons obi.
__label__avk Vesnol (Myotis davidii) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Myotis oxi vey Vespertilionidae yasa ( Myotinae volveyyasa ) ke CHIROPTERA veem. Gan Peters bak 1869 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Myotis davidii (Peters, 1869) (en) vuest- : CITES : Myotis davidii (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Myotis davidii (Peters, 1869) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Myotis davidii (Peters, 1869) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Myotis davidii (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Myotis davidii (Peters, 1869) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Myotis davidii (Peters, 1869) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Myotis davidii (en) vuest- : NCBI : Myotis davidii Ara vuestexa Vesnol (Myotis davidii) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Vesnol (Myotis davidii) Vesnol (Myotis davidii) Vesnol (Myotis davidii)
__label__avk { "type": "Feature", "geometry": { "type": "Point", "coordinates": [29.515295, 64.125889] }, "properties": { "title": "Kuhmo", "description": "", "marker-symbol": "marker", "marker-size": "small", "marker-color": "0050d0" } } Teza Debalas liwot
__label__avk Faytawasik ~ The Sower (EN) Faytawasik ( englavon The Sower ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 32 × 40 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Vincent Van Gogh nederlandaf lingesik bak 11/1888 bal inafa jonvielera koe Paris ( Franca ). Bata trutca koe Van Gogh tcila koe Amsterdam koe Nederlanda re ( 2022 ) tigir. Dere rupec Trutceem ke Van Gogh Stragela La Faille estova iku Hulsker : F 451 ~ JH 1628 |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Faytawasik (5) (trutca ke Van Gogh) Faytawasik (5) (trutca ke Van Gogh)
__label__avk Bifa Afrika Amerika Asia Europa Oceania Koblira 13/08/1852 - Christian Krohg, norgaf lingesik 04/09/1852 - Eilif Peterssen, norgaf lingesik 21/09/1852 - Edmund Leighton, britanaf lingesik Awalkera 04/11/1852 - Dankvart Dreyer, danmarkaf lingesik 1850-e sanda
__label__avk Ictupol (Dipodillus harwoodi) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Dipodillus oxi ( Petteromys volveyoxi )vey Muridae yasa ( Muroidea veyyasa, Gerbillinae volveyyasa ) ke RODENTIA veem ( MYOMORPHA volveyveem ). Gan Thomas bak 1901 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Dipodillus harwoodi (Thomas, 1901) (en) vuest- : CITES : Dipodillus harwoodi (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Dipodillus harwoodi (Thomas, 1901) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Dipodillus harwoodi (Thomas, 1901) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Dipodillus harwoodi (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Dipodillus harwoodi (Thomas, 1901) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Dipodillus harwoodi (Thomas, 1901) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Dipodillus harwoodi (en) vuest- : NCBI : Dipodillus harwoodi Ara vuestexa Ictupol (Dipodillus harwoodi) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Ictupol (Dipodillus harwoodi) Ictupol (Dipodillus harwoodi) Ictupol (Dipodillus harwoodi)
__label__avk Omayrol (Geocapromys brownii) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Geocapromys oxi vey Capromyidae yasa ( Capromyinae volveyyasa ) ke RODENTIA veem ( HYSTRICOMORPHA volveyveem, HYSTRICOGNATHI tolvolveyveem ). Gan Fischer bak 1830 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Geocapromys brownii (Fischer, 1830) (en) vuest- : CITES : Geocapromys brownii (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Geocapromys brownii (Fischer, 1830) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Geocapromys brownii (Fischer, 1830) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Geocapromys brownii (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Geocapromys brownii (Fischer, 1830) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Geocapromys brownii (Fischer, 1830) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Geocapromys brownii (en) vuest- : NCBI : Geocapromys brownii Ara vuestexa Omayrol (Geocapromys brownii) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Omayrol (Geocapromys brownii) Omayrol (Geocapromys brownii) Omayrol (Geocapromys brownii)
__label__avk Vesnol (Macrotus) tir tani moukolafi oxi vey Phyllostomidae yasa ( Phyllostominae volveyyasa ) ke CHIROPTERA veem. Gan Gray bak 1843 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bati oxi vas 2 katca ruldar : |- | 1 | Vesnol (Macrotus californicus) | Macrotus californicus (Baird, 1858) | | |- | 2 | Vesnol (Macrotus waterhousii) | Macrotus waterhousii (Gray, 1843) | | |} Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Macrotus (Gray, 1843) (en) vuest- : CITES : Macrotus (en) vuest- : UICN : oxi Macrotus (Gray, 1843) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Macrotus (Gray, 1843) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Macrotus (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Macrotus (Gray, 1843) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Macrotus (Gray, 1843) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Macrotus (en) vuest- : NCBI : Macrotus Ara vuestexa Vesnol (Macrotus) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Vesnol (Macrotus) Vesnol (Macrotus) Vesnol (Macrotus)
__label__avk Frumba, koawaltana ~ Тополя, освещ?нные солнцем Frumba, koawaltana ( rossiavon Тополя, освещ?нные солнцем ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 38.3 × 27 cm-, i puntalingeks keve liway skuyun gan Fyodor Vasilyev rossiaf lingesik ba megrupena evla. Koe Tretyakov tcila koe Moskva ( Rossia ) re tigir ( 2018 ). Aal is aala Remi trelafa klepa, Fyodor Vasilyev va patectoyafa trutca riwe anton lingeyer, tulon watson gu bata. Inafa grupena trutca ke mila watsa tid : Dere rupec Stragela Frumba, koawaltana (trutca ke Vasilyev) Frumba, koawaltana (trutca ke Vasilyev)
__label__avk Seine bost koe Rouen, Saint-Sever ~ La Seine à Rouen, Saint-Sever (FR) Seine bost koe Rouen, Saint-Sever ( francavon La Seine à Rouen, Saint-Sever ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 65.5 × 92 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Camille Pissarro francaf lingesik bak 1896. Bata trutca koe Orsay yambatcilaxe koe Paris koe Franca re ( 2018 ) tigir. Watsa va Seine bost koe Rouen Watsa va Seine bost koe Rouen va Camille Pissarro remi klepa koswavayar. Ino va konaka trutca oku siatos lingeyer. Tulon grupet : Dere rupec Stragela |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Seine bost koe Rouen, Saint-Sever (trutca ke Pissarro) Seine bost koe Rouen, Saint-Sever (trutca ke Pissarro)
__label__avk Vestasik va Arktika |- |Roald Amundsen |Norgaf |1872-1928 |- |William Baffin |Englaf |1584-1622 |- |Willem Barentsz |Nederlandaf |±1550-1597 |- |Martin Frobisher |Englaf |±1535-1594 |- |Fridtjof Nansen |Norgaf |1861-1930 |- |Adolf Erik Nordenskjöld |Rossiaf |1832-1901 |- |Robert Peary |Amerikaf |1856-1920 |- |} Vestasik Vestasik va Arktika
__label__avk Abjek (Certhiidae) tir tana yasa ke Passeriformes veem. Gan Leach bak 1820 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem oxieem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), 2 oxi zo vertokad : |- | 1 | Abjek (Certhia) | Certhia (Linnaeus, 1758) | | |- | 2 | Abjek (Salpornis) | Salpornis (G.R. Gray, 1847) | | |} Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Certhiidae is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Certhiidae is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Certhiidae (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Certhiidae (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Certhiidae (en) vuest- : NCBI : Certhiidae (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Certhiidae Abjek (Certhiidae) Abjek (Certhiidae) Abjek (Certhiidae) Abjek (Certhiidae)
__label__avk { "type": "Feature", "geometry": { "type": "Point", "coordinates": [-74.854338, 10.777768] }, "properties": { "title": "Polonuevo", "description": "", "marker-symbol": "marker", "marker-size": "small", "marker-color": "0050d0" } } Teza Debalas liwot
__label__avk Batakaf okol koe werdxo, Hermitage, Pontoise ~ Cheval blanc dans un pré, l'Hermitage, Pontoise (FR) Batakaf okol koe werdxo, Hermitage, Pontoise ( francavon Cheval blanc dans un pré, l'Hermitage, Pontoise ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 46 × 55 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Camille Pissarro francaf lingesik bak 1872. Bata trutca koe korikaf dotay re ( 2018 ) tigir. Watsa va Bonol Watsa va Bonol va Camille Pissarro remi klepa koswavayar. Ino va konaka trutca oku siatos lingeyer. Tulon grupet : Dere rupec Stragela |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Batakaf okol koe werdxo, Hermitage, Pontoise (trutca ke Pissarro) Batakaf okol koe werdxo, Hermitage, Pontoise (trutca ke Pissarro)
__label__avk Awalkikxo ke Châlons-sur-Marne ~ Le Cimetière de Châlons-sur-Marne (FR) Awalkikxo ke Châlons-sur-Marne ( francavon Le Cimetière de Châlons-sur-Marne ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 54 × 80 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Félix Vallotton swizaf lingesik bak 1917. Bata trutca koe Izvatcilaxe koe Paris koe Franca re ( 2018 ) tigir. Watsa va Geja Dere rupec Stragela |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Awalkikxo ke Châlons-sur-Marne (trutca ke Vallotton) Awalkikxo ke Châlons-sur-Marne (trutca ke Vallotton)
__label__avk Hannu Salama tir suomiaf suterotik is ezlopik. Koe Kouvola koe Suomia ba 04/10/1936 koblir. Inafa gadava tir Suomiava. Bak 1975 gu Suterotafo Poradro ke Norden Pirdot icde Siinä näkijä missä tekijä berpotam zo gabler. Blirizva |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Salama (Hannu) Salama (Hannu) Salama (Hannu) Salama (Hannu) Salama (Hannu)
__label__avk { "type": "Feature", "geometry": { "type": "Point", "coordinates": [-76.262991, 9.015366] }, "properties": { "title": "Puerto Escondido (Córdoba)", "description": "", "marker-symbol": "marker", "marker-size": "small", "marker-color": "0050d0" } } Teza Debalas liwot
__label__avk Alcalá tir dota vatalte Kolombia, valente Valle del Cauca winka, koe Norte utca. Alcalá arte mon 200 km- lente Cali tigir. Izva Alcalá bak 1791 winugon zo zabduyur. Sanelia Varafa sanelia ke Alcalá tir vas 25 235 irubasik otulayan bak 2020, don 12 730 koe widavafa widega is arak koe 16 monaxo. Monaxo tid : El Dinde El Edén La Estrella La Unión El Higuerón Los Sauces Playas Verdes La Floresta San Felipe Trincheras La Polonia Bélgica Maraveles El Congal La Caña La Cuchilla Tamavafa gadakiewega ke UNESCO Alcalá tir tana dota vawale anamez ke Arayaf fadaf patectoy ke Kolombia ( espanavon Paisaje Cultural Cafetero de Colombia ) bendeyen bak 2011 wetce arayaf debak ke tamavafa gadakiewega ke UNESCO. Ewava |style="vertical-align: top;"| Vuestexa Alcalá Alcalá Alcalá
__label__avk Wixedoga (Hapaloptila) tir tani oxi ke Bucconidae yasa vey Piciformes veem. Gan Sclater bak 1881 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), bati oxi tir tankatcafi : Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Hapaloptila is Piciformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Hapaloptila is Piciformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Hapaloptila (Sclater, 1881) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Hapaloptila (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Hapaloptila (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Hapaloptila (en) vuest- : NCBI : Hapaloptila (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Hapaloptila Wixedoga (Hapaloptila) Wixedoga (Hapaloptila) Wixedoga (Hapaloptila) Wixedoga (Hapaloptila)
__label__avk { "type": "Feature", "geometry": { "type": "Point", "coordinates": [-75.672851, 4.835786] }, "properties": { "title": "Dosquebradas", "description": "", "marker-symbol": "marker", "marker-size": "small", "marker-color": "0050d0" } } Teza Debalas liwot
__label__avk Rašip Mali ( italiavon Idra Piccola ) tir tana ewalama ke Kornat ewalatum tigisa koe Adriatika Bira, vatalte Xrvatska, grocelon ice Šibenik widava is poke Piškera ewala. Izva is sanelia Mali 1409 kali 1797 tiyir digiks ke sokasane ke Venezia. Sanelia ke ewala tiyir saneliiskafa bak 2001. Rašip Mali re tir dem Kornati vedeyaf gerd, do 88 ara ewala iku uvendewala. Pokefa ewalama Piškera Maslinjak Arapovac Rašip Veli Rašipić Kornat Mana Dere rupec (hr) Liwot va Rašip Mali ewala, dene arkod.hr Vuestexa Rašip Mali Rašip Mali
__label__avk Trig dem plastuba ~ Still Life: Bowl with Daisies (EN) Trig dem plastuba ( englavon Still Life: Bowl with Daisies ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 33 × 42 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Vincent Van Gogh nederlandaf lingesik bak 05/1888 bal inafa jonvielera koe Paris ( Franca ). Bata trutca koe Virginia yambatcilaxe koe Richmond koe Tanarasokeem re ( 2022 ) tigir. Dere rupec Trutceem ke Van Gogh Stragela La Faille estova iku Hulsker : F 591 ~ JH 1429 |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Trig dem plastuba (2) (trutca ke Van Gogh) Trig dem plastuba (2) (trutca ke Van Gogh)
__label__avk Deauville, kolom ~ Deauville, le bassin à bateaux (FR) Deauville, kolom ( francavon Deauville, le bassin à bateaux ) tir trutcama lumkirafa gu 35 × 27 cm-, i puntalingeks keve intabopica skuyun gan Eugène Boudin francaf lingesik bak 1887. Bata trutca koe Clark yambatcilaxe koe Williamstown koe Tanarasokeem re ( 2018 ) tigir. Dere rupec Stragela Tcila Xantaza dene internet ok internetxo |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Deauville, kolom (5) (trutca ke Boudin) Deauville, kolom (5) (trutca ke Boudin)
__label__avk Slakol (Pseudomys higginsi) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Pseudomys oxi vey Muridae yasa ( Muroidea veyyasa, Murinae volveyyasa ) ke RODENTIA veem ( MYOMORPHA volveyveem ). Gan Trouessart bak 1897 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Pseudomys higginsi (Trouessart, 1897) (en) vuest- : CITES : Pseudomys higginsi (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Pseudomys higginsi (Trouessart, 1897) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Pseudomys higginsi (Trouessart, 1897) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Pseudomys higginsi (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Pseudomys higginsi (Trouessart, 1897) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Pseudomys higginsi (Trouessart, 1897) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Pseudomys higginsi (en) vuest- : NCBI : Pseudomys higginsi Ara vuestexa Slakol (Pseudomys higginsi) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Slakol (Pseudomys higginsi) Slakol (Pseudomys higginsi) Slakol (Pseudomys higginsi)
__label__avk Slakol (Notomys cervinus) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Notomys oxi vey Muridae yasa ( Muroidea veyyasa, Murinae volveyyasa ) ke RODENTIA veem ( MYOMORPHA volveyveem ). Gan Gould bak 1851 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Notomys cervinus (Gould, 1851) (en) vuest- : CITES : Notomys cervinus (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Notomys cervinus (Gould, 1851) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Notomys cervinus (Gould, 1851) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Notomys cervinus (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Notomys cervinus (Gould, 1851) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Notomys cervinus (Gould, 1851) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Notomys cervinus (en) vuest- : NCBI : Notomys cervinus Ara vuestexa Slakol (Notomys cervinus) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Slakol (Notomys cervinus) Slakol (Notomys cervinus) Slakol (Notomys cervinus)
__label__avk Bresitol (Vulpes vulpes fulvus) tir tana moukolafa apta ke vulpes katca vey Vulpes oxi vey Canidae yasa ke CARNIVORA veem ( CANIFORMIA volveyveem ). Gan Desmarest bak 1820 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem milkatcaf apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), konakara apta dere tid ke mila veyafa katca : Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Vulpes vulpes fulvus (Desmarest, 1820) (en) vuest- : CITES : Vulpes vulpes fulvus (en) vuest- : UICN : apta Vulpes vulpes fulvus (Desmarest, 1820) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Vulpes vulpes fulvus (Desmarest, 1820) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Vulpes vulpes fulvus (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Vulpes vulpes fulvus (Desmarest, 1820) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Vulpes vulpes fulvus (Desmarest, 1820) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Vulpes vulpes fulvus (en) vuest- : NCBI : Vulpes vulpes fulvus Ara vuestexa Bresitol (Vulpes vulpes fulvus) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Bresitol (Vulpes vulpes fulvus) Bresitol (Vulpes vulpes fulvus) Bresitol (Vulpes vulpes fulvus)
__label__avk Bancimol (Lepilemur betsileo) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Lepilemur oxi vey Lepilemuridae yasa ( Lemuroidea veyyasa ) ke PRIMATES veem ( STREPSIRRHINI volveyveem, LEMURIFORMES tolvolveyveem ). Gan Louis bak 2006 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Bata katca co tir aptiskafa. Dere rupel → Wafra dem bancoldunoleem Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : CITES : Lepilemur betsileo (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Lepilemur betsileo (Louis, 2006) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Lepilemur betsileo (Louis, 2006) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Lepilemur betsileo (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Lepilemur betsileo (Louis, 2006) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Lepilemur betsileo (Louis, 2006) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Lepilemur betsileo (en) vuest- : NCBI : Lepilemur betsileo Ara vuestexa Bancimol (Lepilemur betsileo) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Bancimol (Lepilemur betsileo) Bancimol (Lepilemur betsileo) Bancimol (Lepilemur betsileo)
__label__avk Corera ~ Visjon (NO) Corera ( norgavon Visjon ) tir trutca, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Edvard Munch norgaf lingesik bak 1892. Bata trutca koe Munch tcila koe Oslo koe Norga re ( 2018 ) tigir. Dere rupec Stragela |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Corera (trutca ke Munch) Corera (trutca ke Munch)
__label__avk { "type": "Feature", "geometry": { "type": "Point", "coordinates": [-74.164835, 8.791652] }, "properties": { "title": "Altos del Rosario", "description": "", "marker-symbol": "marker", "marker-size": "small", "marker-color": "0050d0" } } Teza Debalas liwot
__label__avk Drozba (Cleptornis) tir tani oxi ke Zosteropidae yasa vey Passeriformes veem. Gan Oustalet bak 1889 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), bati oxi tir tankatcafi : Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Cleptornis is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Cleptornis is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Cleptornis (Oustalet, 1889) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Cleptornis (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Cleptornis (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Cleptornis (en) vuest- : NCBI : Cleptornis (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Cleptornis Drozba (Cleptornis) Drozba (Cleptornis) Drozba (Cleptornis) Drozba (Cleptornis)
__label__avk Tovol (Komodomys) tir tani moukolafi oxi vey Muridae yasa ( Muroidea veyyasa, Murinae volveyyasa ) ke RODENTIA veem ( MYOMORPHA volveyveem ). Gan Musser & Boeadi bak 1980 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bati oxi tir tankatcafi : |- | 1 | Tovol (Komodomys rintjanus) | Komodomys rintjanus (Sody, 1941) | | |} Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Komodomys (Musser and Boeadi, 1980) (en) vuest- : CITES : Komodomys (en) vuest- : UICN : oxi Komodomys (Musser and Boeadi, 1980) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Komodomys (Musser and Boeadi, 1980) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Komodomys (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Komodomys (Musser and Boeadi, 1980) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Komodomys (Musser and Boeadi, 1980) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Komodomys (en) vuest- : NCBI : Komodomys Ara vuestexa Tovol (Komodomys) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Tovol (Komodomys) Tovol (Komodomys) Tovol (Komodomys)
__label__avk Kolavara va nuga ~ Le bain de pieds (FR) Kolavara va nuga ( francavon Le bain de pieds ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 73 × 92 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Camille Pissarro francaf lingesik bak 1895. Bata trutca koe Art Institute tcila koe Chicago koe Tanarasokeem re ( 2018 ) tigir. Watsa va Kolavara Watsa va Kolavara va Camille Pissarro remi klepa koswavayar. Ino va konaka trutca oku siatos lingeyer. Tulon grupet : Dere rupec Stragela |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Kolavara va nuga (trutca ke Pissarro) Kolavara va nuga (trutca ke Pissarro)
__label__avk Vimkol (Sorex nanus) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Sorex oxi ( Otisorex volveyoxi ) vey Soricidae yasa ( Soricinae volveyyasa ) ke SORICOMORPHA veem. Gan Merriam bak 1895 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca vas 8 apta ruldar : Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Sorex nanus (Merriam, 1895) (en) vuest- : CITES : Sorex nanus (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Sorex nanus (Merriam, 1895) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Sorex nanus (Merriam, 1895) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Sorex nanus (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Sorex nanus (Merriam, 1895) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Sorex nanus (Merriam, 1895) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Sorex nanus (en) vuest- : NCBI : Sorex nanus Ara vuestexa Vimkol (Sorex nanus) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Vimkol (Sorex nanus) Vimkol (Sorex nanus) Vimkol (Sorex nanus)
__label__avk Proklavu (Percnostola) tir tani oxi ke Furnariidae yasa vey Passeriformes veem. Gan Cabanis & Heine bak 1860 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), 2 katca zo vertokad : Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Percnostola is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Percnostola is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Percnostola (Cabanis & Heine, 1860) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Percnostola (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Percnostola (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Percnostola (en) vuest- : NCBI : Percnostola (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Percnostola Proklavu (Percnostola) Proklavu (Percnostola) Proklavu (Percnostola) Proklavu (Percnostola)
__label__avk Proklavu (Lophotriccus) tir tani oxi ke Tyrannidae yasa vey Passeriformes veem. Gan Berlepsch bak 1884 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), 4 katca zo vertokad : Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Lophotriccus is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Lophotriccus is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Lophotriccus (Berlepsch, 1884) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Lophotriccus (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Lophotriccus (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Lophotriccus (en) vuest- : NCBI : Lophotriccus (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Lophotriccus Proklavu (Lophotriccus) Proklavu (Lophotriccus) Proklavu (Lophotriccus) Proklavu (Lophotriccus)
__label__avk Gerard Kornelis van het Reve tir nederlandaf suterotik. Koe Amsterdam koe Nederlanda ba 14/12/1923 koblir. Ba 08/04/2006 koe Zulte koe Belga awalker. Inafa gadava tir Nederlandava. Bak 2001 gu Nederlandavafo Suterotafo Poradro icde intaf grabomeem zo gabler. |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Reve (Gerard) Reve (Gerard) Reve (Gerard) Reve (Gerard) Reve (Gerard)
__label__avk Vimkol (Sorex mirabilis) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Sorex oxi ( Ognevia volveyoxi ) vey Soricidae yasa ( Soricinae volveyyasa ) ke SORICOMORPHA veem. Gan Ognev bak 1937 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Sorex mirabilis (Ognev, 1937) (en) vuest- : CITES : Sorex mirabilis (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Sorex mirabilis (Ognev, 1937) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Sorex mirabilis (Ognev, 1937) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Sorex mirabilis (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Sorex mirabilis (Ognev, 1937) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Sorex mirabilis (Ognev, 1937) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Sorex mirabilis (en) vuest- : NCBI : Sorex mirabilis Ara vuestexa Vimkol (Sorex mirabilis) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Vimkol (Sorex mirabilis) Vimkol (Sorex mirabilis) Vimkol (Sorex mirabilis)
__label__avk { "type": "Feature", "geometry": { "type": "Point", "coordinates": [-75.953477, 6.68072] }, "properties": { "title": "Giraldo", "description": "", "marker-symbol": "marker", "marker-size": "small", "marker-color": "0050d0" } } Teza Debalas liwot
__label__avk Delt va Vera Ilinitcna Repina nazbeya ke lingesik ~ Осенний букет. Портрет Веры Ильиничны Репиной, дочери художника (RU) Delt va Vera Ilinitcna Repina nazbeya ke lingesik ( rossiavon Осенний букет. Портрет Веры Ильиничны Репиной, дочери художника ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 114 × 67 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Ilya Yefimovitc Repin rossiaf lingesik bak 1892. Koe Государственная Третьяковская галерея tcilaxe koe Moskva ( Rossia ) re tigir ( 2018 ). Bata trutca tir ayikyaf delt, ke tane gelukafe detce ke Repin ( loa 100 grupena trutca icde bata watsa ). Detce ke bat delt tir taneafa nazbeikya ke Repin, Vera Ilinitcna. Dere rupec Stragela Divefa vuestexa va trutca : klita |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Delt va Vera Ilinitcna Repina nazbeya ke lingesik (trutca ke Repin) Delt va Vera Ilinitcna Repina nazbeya ke lingesik (trutca ke Repin)
__label__avk Polustanok ~ Полустанок (RU) Polustanok ( rossiavon Полустанок ) tir trutcama lumkirafa gu 21 × 25 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama keve liway skuyun gan Isaak Levitan rossiaf lingesik bak sanda mali 1880-e. Koe Isaak Levitan Tcilamona koe Plyos ( Rossia ) re tigir ( 2018 ). Bata trutca tir patectoy, ke tele gelukafe detce ke Levitan ( loa 200 grupena trutca icde bata watsa ). Dere rupec Stragela |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Polustanok (trutca ke Levitan) Polustanok (trutca ke Levitan)
__label__avk Koe aalxo leve taelafta ~ Waldinneres bei Mondschein (DE) Koe aalxo leve taelafta ( germanavon Waldinneres bei Mondschein ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 70.5 × 49 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Caspar David Friedrich germanaf lingesik bak 1823-1830. Bata trutca koe Alte Nationalgalerie yambatcilaxe koe Berlin koe Germana re ( 2018 ) tigir. Dere rupec Stragela |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Koe aalxo leve taelafta (trutca ke Friedrich) Koe aalxo leve taelafta (trutca ke Friedrich)
__label__avk Palestina tir dota vagetalte Kolombia, vagee Huila winka, koe Subsur utca. Palestina arte mon 210 km- getalte Neiva winkaf widot tigir, vatice krant ke Magdalena bostap. Izva Palestina bak 1860 winugon zo zabduyur. Sanelia Varafa sanelia ke Palestina tir vas 11 159 irubasik otulayan bak 2015, don 2080 koe widega is arak koe konako monaxo. Vuestexa |style="vertical-align: top;"| Palestina Palestina Palestina
__label__avk Nudgoyol (Anseranatidae) tir tana yasa ke Anseriformes veem. Gan Sclater bak 1880 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem oxieem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), bata yasa tir tanoxifa : |- | 1 | Nudgoyol (Anseranas) | Anseranas (Lesson, 1828) | | |} Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Anseranatidae is Anseriformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Anseranatidae is Anseriformes (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Anseranatidae (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Anseranatidae (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Anseranatidae (en) vuest- : NCBI : Anseranatidae (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Anseranatidae Nudgoyol (Anseranatidae) Nudgoyol (Anseranatidae) Nudgoyol (Anseranatidae) Nudgoyol (Anseranatidae)
__label__avk Tsiyenol (Dendromus leucostomus) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Dendromus oxi vey Nesomyidae yasa ( Muroidea veyyasa, Dendromurinae volveyyasa ) ke RODENTIA veem ( MYOMORPHA volveyveem ). Gan Monard bak 1933 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Dendromus leucostomus (Monard, 1933) (en) vuest- : CITES : Dendromus leucostomus (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Dendromus leucostomus (Monard, 1933) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Dendromus leucostomus (Monard, 1933) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Dendromus leucostomus (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Dendromus leucostomus (Monard, 1933) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Dendromus leucostomus (Monard, 1933) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Dendromus leucostomus (en) vuest- : NCBI : Dendromus leucostomus Ara vuestexa Tsiyenol (Dendromus leucostomus) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Tsiyenol (Dendromus leucostomus) Tsiyenol (Dendromus leucostomus) Tsiyenol (Dendromus leucostomus)
__label__avk Proklavu (Xolmis) tir tani oxi ke Tyrannidae yasa vey Passeriformes veem. Gan Boie bak 1826 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), 7 katca zo vertokad : Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Xolmis is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Xolmis is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Xolmis (Boie, 1826) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Xolmis (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Xolmis (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Xolmis (en) vuest- : NCBI : Xolmis (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Xolmis Proklavu (Xolmis) Proklavu (Xolmis) Proklavu (Xolmis) Proklavu (Xolmis)
__label__avk Tcatesikya kene Touques kuksa ~ Lavandières sur le bord de la Touques (FR) Tcatesikya kene Touques kuksa ( francavon Lavandières sur le bord de la Touques ) tir trutcama lumkirafa gu 24 × 35 cm-, i puntalingeks keve intabopica skuyun gan Eugène Boudin francaf lingesik bak 1895. Bata trutca koe Langmatt tcila koe Baden koe Swiza re ( 2018 ) tigir. Dere rupec Stragela Tcila Xantaza dene internet ok internetxo |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Tcatesikya kene Touques kuksa (8) (trutca ke Boudin) Tcatesikya kene Touques kuksa (8) (trutca ke Boudin)
__label__avk Iosif Brodski ( rossiavon Иосиф Александрович Бродский ) tir rossiavaf suterotik. Ba 24/05/1940 koe Leningrad koe TSSS kobliyir. Ba 28/01/1996 koe New York koe Tanarasokeem awalkeyer. Inafa gadava tir Rossiava. Bak 1987 gu Nobel Suterotafo Poradro zo gabler. Blirizva |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Brodski (Iosif) Brodski (Iosif) Brodski (Iosif) Brodski (Iosif)
__label__avk Zuptay (Lamprolia) tir tani oxi ke Rhipiduridae yasa vey Passeriformes veem. Gan Finsch bak 1874 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), 2 katca zo vertokad : Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Lamprolia is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Lamprolia is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Lamprolia (Finsch, 1874) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Lamprolia (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Lamprolia (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Lamprolia (en) vuest- : NCBI : Lamprolia (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Lamprolia Zuptay (Lamprolia) Zuptay (Lamprolia) Zuptay (Lamprolia) Zuptay (Lamprolia)
__label__avk Vamba (Cicinnurus) tir tani oxi ke Paradisaeidae yasa vey Passeriformes veem. Gan Vieillot bak 1816 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), bati oxi tir tankatcafi : Cicinnurus regius Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Cicinnurus is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Cicinnurus is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Cicinnurus (Vieillot, 1816) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Cicinnurus (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Cicinnurus (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Cicinnurus (en) vuest- : NCBI : Cicinnurus (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Cicinnurus Vamba (Cicinnurus) Vamba (Cicinnurus) Vamba (Cicinnurus) Vamba (Cicinnurus)
__label__avk Kenibesa femusikya ~ La Fileuse endormie (FR) Kenibesa femusikya ( francavon La Fileuse endormie ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 91 × 115 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Gustave Courbet francaf lingesik bak 1853. Bata trutca koe Fabre tcilaxe koe Montpellier koe Franca re ( 2018 ) tigir. Watsa va ayikyaf delt Remi klepa, Gustave Courbet va konaka trutca ok konak siatos ke mila trutca watson gu ayikyaf delt lingeyer. Lana tid grupepena. Dere rupec Stragela |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Kenibesa femusikya (trutca ke Courbet) Kenibesa femusikya (trutca ke Courbet)
__label__avk Tovol (Grammomys gigas) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Grammomys oxi vey Muridae yasa ( Muroidea veyyasa, Murinae volveyyasa ) ke RODENTIA veem ( MYOMORPHA volveyveem ). Gan Dollman bak 1911 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Grammomys gigas (Dollman, 1911) (en) vuest- : CITES : Grammomys gigas (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Grammomys gigas (Dollman, 1911) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Grammomys gigas (Dollman, 1911) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Grammomys gigas (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Grammomys gigas (Dollman, 1911) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Grammomys gigas (Dollman, 1911) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Grammomys gigas (en) vuest- : NCBI : Grammomys gigas Ara vuestexa Tovol (Grammomys gigas) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Tovol (Grammomys gigas) Tovol (Grammomys gigas) Tovol (Grammomys gigas)
__label__avk Zenki (Nycticorax) tir tani oxi ke Ardeidae yasa vey Pelecaniformes veem. Gan Forster bak 1817 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), 6 katca zo vertokad, don : Nycticorax caledonicus Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Nycticorax is Pelecaniformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Nycticorax is Pelecaniformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Nycticorax (Forster, 1817) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Nycticorax (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Nycticorax (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Nycticorax (en) vuest- : NCBI : Nycticorax (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Nycticorax Zenki (Nycticorax) Zenki (Nycticorax) Zenki (Nycticorax) Zenki (Nycticorax)
__label__avk Sempuz (Steatornis) tir tani oxi ke Steatornithidae yasa vey Caprimulgiformes veem. Gan Humboldt bak 1814 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), bati oxi tir tankatcafi : Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Steatornis is Caprimulgiformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Steatornis is Caprimulgiformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Steatornis (Humboldt, 1814) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Steatornis (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Steatornis (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Steatornis (en) vuest- : NCBI : Steatornis (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Steatornis Sempuz (Steatornis) Sempuz (Steatornis) Sempuz (Steatornis) Sempuz (Steatornis)
__label__avk Sucre tir dota valente Kolombia, vagerone Sucre winka, koe La Mojana utca. Sucre arte mon 170 km- gerone Sincelejo winkaf widot tigir. Izva Sucre bak 1799 winugon zo zabduyur. Sanelia Varafa sanelia ke Sucre tir vas 21 716 irubasik otulayan bak 2015, don 7781 koe widega is arak koe konako monaxo. Nelkafo monaxo tid : La Isla del Coco El Congreso Malambo Montería Campo Alegre San Luis San Mateo Orejero Córdoba Boca de Higuerón Arboleda La Ventura San Jacinto Pueblonuevo La Concepción Vuestexa |style="vertical-align: top;"| Sucre Sucre Sucre
__label__avk Woyek (Clamator) tir tani oxi ke Cuculidae yasa vey Cuculiformes veem. Gan Kaup bak 1829 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), 4 katca zo vertokad : Clamator coromandus Clamator glandarius Clamator jacobinus Clamator levaillantii Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Clamator is Cuculiformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Clamator is Cuculiformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Clamator (Kaup, 1829) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Clamator (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Clamator (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Clamator (en) vuest- : NCBI : Clamator (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Clamator Woyek (Clamator) Woyek (Clamator) Woyek (Clamator) Woyek (Clamator)
__label__avk Puerto Colombia tir dota valente Kolombia, valente Atlántico winka, koe Norte utca. Puerto Colombia arte mon 13 km- talte Barranquilla winkaf widot is koe inafa troskadafa rea tigir, kene Kariba bira. Izva Puerto Colombia bak 1888 winugon zo zabduyur. Sanelia Varafa sanelia ke Puerto Colombia tir vas 27 107 irubasik otulayan bak 2015, don 22 519 koe widavafa widega is arak koe konako monaxo. Nelkafo monaxo tid : Salgar Sabanilla Lagos de Caujaral Villa Campestre Ewava Vuestexa |style="vertical-align: top;"| Puerto Colombia Puerto Colombia Puerto Colombia
__label__avk Kerguelen ewaleem ( francavafa tiyara : kɜːrɡələn ), dere Kergueleneem ok kalkotavan gu Kergeleneem, voxosk dayoltanaf ton Ewaleem ke Erolara ( francavon : Îles de la Désolation ), sotir lospa dem yona amidatumafa tculkafa ewala, vagee India welfa tigisa is vas francafe sokasane pasusa. Ewaleem dive sidayeem ileon madawer, telo lovolilefo francafo tawavo, Réunion ewala, arte 3 000 km- tigir. Tela molavekasafa pakava, tadlena gan tursia, wori sotir olkom ke lodatafa welfafa azekexa. Tela kerguelenafa azekexa moe antarktikafa pozla tigir ise levplawanaf tadavoc lumon gu 1,2 celemoye tollumafe decitmetre en tir. Izva Kerguelen ewaleem bak 1772 gan Yves Joseph de Kerguelen de Trémarec francaf totasik zo kosmayar. Bantan gu Îles de la Désolation taneon yoltayar azen arti konaka tanda James Cook kotgrupaf englaf totasik poron gu kosmasik tolyoltayar. Ewala ke India Welfa
__label__avk Patectoy ke Pargolovo ~ Пейзаж. Парголово Patectoy ke Pargolovo ( rossiavon Пейзаж. Парголово ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 53 × 75 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Fyodor Vasilyev rossiaf lingesik bak 1868. Koe Radictcev winkafe tcilaxe koe Saratov ( Rossia ) re tigir ( 2018 ). Tawaday Remi trelafa klepa, Fyodor Vasilyev va patectoyafa trutca riwe anton lingeyer, tulon watson gu bata. Inafa grupena trutca ke mila watsa tid : Dere rupec Stragela Patectoy ke Pargolovo (trutca ke Vasilyev) Patectoy ke Pargolovo (trutca ke Vasilyev)
__label__avk Ayikya tcatesa va grita ko kuksa ~ Femme lavant du linge dans une rivière (FR) Ayikya tcatesa va grita ko kuksa ( francavon Femme lavant du linge dans une rivière ) tir trutcama lumkirafa gu 16.9 × 24 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Camille Pissarro francaf lingesik moni 1856. Bata trutca koe korikaf dotay re ( 2018 ) tigir. Watsa va Tawadayikya Dere rupec Stragela |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Ayikya tcatesa va grita ko kuksa (trutca ke Pissarro) Ayikya tcatesa va grita ko kuksa (trutca ke Pissarro)
__label__avk Amerigo Vespucci ( 1454-1512 ) ~ italiaf vestasik va Amerika Amerigo Vespucci tiyir kotgrupaf italiaf totasik isu vestasik bak tena ke 15-eafa decemda isu toza ke 16-eafa. Vestara va krimtaki ke lentefa Geeamerika. Yolt ke Amerika sotir vey inaf yolt. |} Vespucci (Amerigo) Vespucci (Amerigo)
__label__avk Tota moe domega ~ Лодка на берегу (RU) Tota moe domega ( rossiavon Лодка на берегу ) tir trutcama lumkirafa gu 18 × 25 cm-, i puntalingeks keve inta skuyun gan Isaak Levitan rossiaf lingesik bak sanda mali 1880-e. Koe Golafe Yambatcilaxe koe Omsk ( Rossia ) re tigir ( 2018 ). Bata trutca tir patectoy, ke tele gelukafe detce ke Levitan ( loa 200 grupena trutca icde bata watsa ). Dere rupec Stragela |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Tota moe domega (trutca ke Levitan) Tota moe domega (trutca ke Levitan)
__label__avk Remco Campert tir nederlandaf suterotik. Koe Den Haag koe Nederlanda ba 29/07/1929 koblir. Inafa gadava tir Nederlandava. Bak 2015 gu Nederlandavafo Suterotafo Poradro icde intaf grabomeem zo gabler. |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Campert (Remco) Campert (Remco) Campert (Remco) Campert (Remco) Campert (Remco)
__label__avk Vimkol (Crocidura goliath) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Crocidura oxi vey Soricidae yasa ( Crocidurinae volveyyasa ) ke SORICOMORPHA veem. Gan Thomas bak 1906 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca vas 2 apta ruldar : Vimkol (Crocidura goliath goliath) (Thomas, 1906) Vimkol (Crocidura goliath nimbasilvanus) (Hutterer, 2003) Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Crocidura goliath (Thomas, 1906) (en) vuest- : CITES : Crocidura goliath (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Crocidura goliath (Thomas, 1906) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Crocidura goliath (Thomas, 1906) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Crocidura goliath (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Crocidura goliath (Thomas, 1906) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Crocidura goliath (Thomas, 1906) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Crocidura goliath (en) vuest- : NCBI : Crocidura goliath Ara vuestexa Vimkol (Crocidura goliath) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Vimkol (Crocidura goliath) Vimkol (Crocidura goliath) Vimkol (Crocidura goliath)
__label__avk Slakevol (Sigmodon arizonae) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Sigmodon oxi ( Sigmodon volveyoxi )vey Cricetidae yasa ( Muroidea veyyasa, Sigmodontinae volveyyasa ) ke RODENTIA veem ( MYOMORPHA volveyveem ). Gan Mearns bak 1890 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Sigmodon arizonae (Mearns, 1890) (en) vuest- : CITES : Sigmodon arizonae (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Sigmodon arizonae (Mearns, 1890) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Sigmodon arizonae (Mearns, 1890) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Sigmodon arizonae (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Sigmodon arizonae (Mearns, 1890) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Sigmodon arizonae (Mearns, 1890) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Sigmodon arizonae (en) vuest- : NCBI : Sigmodon arizonae Ara vuestexa Slakevol (Sigmodon arizonae) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Slakevol (Sigmodon arizonae) Slakevol (Sigmodon arizonae) Slakevol (Sigmodon arizonae)
__label__avk Amor og Psyke ~ Amor og Psyke (NO) Amor og Psyke ( norgavon Amor og Psyke ) tir trutca, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Edvard Munch norgaf lingesik bak 1907. Bata trutca koe Munch tcila koe Oslo koe Norga re ( 2018 ) tigir. Dere rupec Stragela |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Amor og Psyke (trutca ke Munch) Amor og Psyke (trutca ke Munch)
__label__avk Nabala (Agelaioides) tir tani oxi ke Icteridae yasa vey Passeriformes veem. Gan Cassin bak 1866 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), 2 katca zo vertokad : Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Agelaioides is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Agelaioides is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Agelaioides (Cassin, 1866) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Agelaioides (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Agelaioides (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Agelaioides (en) vuest- : NCBI : Agelaioides (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Agelaioides Nabala (Agelaioides) Nabala (Agelaioides) Nabala (Agelaioides) Nabala (Agelaioides)
__label__avk Nabala (Agelasticus) tir tani oxi ke Icteridae yasa vey Passeriformes veem. Gan Cabanis bak 1851 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), 3 katca zo vertokad : Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Agelasticus is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Agelasticus is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Agelasticus (Cabanis, 1851) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Agelasticus (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Agelasticus (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Agelasticus (en) vuest- : NCBI : Agelasticus (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Agelasticus Nabala (Agelasticus) Nabala (Agelasticus) Nabala (Agelasticus) Nabala (Agelasticus)
__label__avk Vesnol (Glauconycteris superba) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Glauconycteris oxi vey Vespertilionidae yasa ( Vespertilioninae volveyyasa )ke CHIROPTERA veem. Gan Hayman bak 1939 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Glauconycteris superba (Hayman, 1939) (en) vuest- : CITES : Glauconycteris superba (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Glauconycteris superba (Hayman, 1939) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Glauconycteris superba (Hayman, 1939) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Glauconycteris superba (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Glauconycteris superba (Hayman, 1939) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Glauconycteris superba (Hayman, 1939) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Glauconycteris superba (en) vuest- : NCBI : Glauconycteris superba Ara vuestexa Vesnol (Glauconycteris superba) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Vesnol (Glauconycteris superba) Vesnol (Glauconycteris superba) Vesnol (Glauconycteris superba)
__label__avk Ekoltuca ~ Coquèterie (FR) Ekoltuca ( francavon Coquèterie ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 89 × 116 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Félix Vallotton swizaf lingesik bak 1911. Bata trutca koe megrupeno xo re ( 2018 ) tigir. Watsa va Monafa nakila Dere rupec Stragela |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Ekoltuca (trutca ke Vallotton) Ekoltuca (trutca ke Vallotton)
__label__avk Werpazol (Idiurus) tir tani moukolafi oxi vey Anomaluridae yasa ( Zenkerellinae volveyyasa ) ke RODENTIA veem ( ANOMALUROMORPHA volveyveem ). Gan Matschie bak 1894 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bati oxi vas 2 katca ruldar : |- | 1 | Werpazol (Idiurus macrotis) | Idiurus macrotis (Miller, 1898) | | |- | 2 | Werpazol (Idiurus zenkeri) | Idiurus zenkeri (Matschie, 1894) | | |} Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Idiurus (Matschie, 1894) (en) vuest- : CITES : Idiurus (en) vuest- : UICN : oxi Idiurus (Matschie, 1894) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Idiurus (Matschie, 1894) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Idiurus (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Idiurus (Matschie, 1894) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Idiurus (Matschie, 1894) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Idiurus (en) vuest- : NCBI : Idiurus Ara vuestexa Werpazol (Idiurus) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Werpazol (Idiurus) Werpazol (Idiurus) Werpazol (Idiurus)
__label__avk Vesnol (Pteropus molossinus) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Pteropus oxi vey Pteropodidae yasa ke CHIROPTERA veem. Gan Temminck bak 1853 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Pteropus molossinus (Temminck, 1853) (en) vuest- : CITES : Pteropus molossinus (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Pteropus molossinus (Temminck, 1853) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Pteropus molossinus (Temminck, 1853) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Pteropus molossinus (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Pteropus molossinus (Temminck, 1853) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Pteropus molossinus (Temminck, 1853) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Pteropus molossinus (en) vuest- : NCBI : Pteropus molossinus Ara vuestexa Vesnol (Pteropus molossinus) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Vesnol (Pteropus molossinus) Vesnol (Pteropus molossinus) Vesnol (Pteropus molossinus)
__label__avk Warkundol (Dasypus kappleri) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Dasypus oxi vey Dasypodidae yasa ( Dasypodinae volveyyasa ) ke CINGULATA veem. Gan Krauss bak 1862 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca vas 2 apta ruldar : Warkundol (Dasypus kappleri kappleri) (Krauss, 1862) Warkundol (Dasypus kappleri pastasae) (Thomas, 1901) Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Dasypus kappleri (Krauss, 1862) (en) vuest- : CITES : Dasypus kappleri (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Dasypus kappleri (Krauss, 1862) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Dasypus kappleri (Krauss, 1862) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Dasypus kappleri (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Dasypus kappleri (Krauss, 1862) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Dasypus kappleri (Krauss, 1862) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Dasypus kappleri (en) vuest- : NCBI : Dasypus kappleri Ara vuestexa Warkundol (Dasypus kappleri) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Warkundol (Dasypus kappleri) Warkundol (Dasypus kappleri) Warkundol (Dasypus kappleri)
__label__avk Vimkol (Ruwenzorisorex) tir tani moukolafi oxi vey Soricidae yasa ( Crocidurinae volveyyasa ) ke SORICOMORPHA veem. Gan Hutterer bak 1986 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bati oxi tir tankatcafi : |- | 1 | Vimkol (Ruwenzorisorex suncoides) | Ruwenzorisorex suncoides (Osgood, 1936) | | |} Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Ruwenzorisorex (Hutterer, 1986) (en) vuest- : CITES : Ruwenzorisorex (en) vuest- : UICN : oxi Ruwenzorisorex (Hutterer, 1986) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Ruwenzorisorex (Hutterer, 1986) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Ruwenzorisorex (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Ruwenzorisorex (Hutterer, 1986) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Ruwenzorisorex (Hutterer, 1986) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Ruwenzorisorex (en) vuest- : NCBI : Ruwenzorisorex Ara vuestexa Vimkol (Ruwenzorisorex) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Vimkol (Ruwenzorisorex) Vimkol (Ruwenzorisorex) Vimkol (Ruwenzorisorex)
__label__avk Vimkol (Chimarrogale phaeura) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Chimarrogale oxi vey Soricidae yasa ( Soricinae volveyyasa ) ke SORICOMORPHA veem. Gan Thomas bak 1898 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Chimarrogale phaeura (Thomas, 1898) (en) vuest- : CITES : Chimarrogale phaeura (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Chimarrogale phaeura (Thomas, 1898) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Chimarrogale phaeura (Thomas, 1898) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Chimarrogale phaeura (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Chimarrogale phaeura (Thomas, 1898) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Chimarrogale phaeura (Thomas, 1898) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Chimarrogale phaeura (en) vuest- : NCBI : Chimarrogale phaeura Ara vuestexa Vimkol (Chimarrogale phaeura) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Vimkol (Chimarrogale phaeura) Vimkol (Chimarrogale phaeura) Vimkol (Chimarrogale phaeura)
__label__avk Peang (Juliamyia) tir tani oxi ke Trochilidae yasa vey Apodiformes veem. Gan Bonaparte bak 1854 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), bati oxi tir tankatcafi : Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Juliamyia is Apodiformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Juliamyia is Apodiformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Juliamyia (Bonaparte, 1854) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Juliamyia (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Juliamyia (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Juliamyia (en) vuest- : NCBI : Juliamyia (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Juliamyia Peang (Juliamyia) Peang (Juliamyia) Peang (Juliamyia) Peang (Juliamyia)
__label__avk Kustrol (Giraffa) tir tani moukolafi oxi vey Giraffidae yasa ke ARTIODACTYLA veem. Gan Brisson bak 1762 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bati oxi tir tankatcafi : |- | 1 | Kustrol (Giraffa camelopardalis) | Giraffa camelopardalis (Linnaeus, 1758) | | |} Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Giraffa (Brisson, 1762) (en) vuest- : CITES : Giraffa (en) vuest- : UICN : oxi Giraffa (Brisson, 1762) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Giraffa (Brisson, 1762) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Giraffa (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Giraffa (Brisson, 1762) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Giraffa (Brisson, 1762) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Giraffa (en) vuest- : NCBI : Giraffa Ara vuestexa Kustrol (Giraffa) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Kustrol (Giraffa) Kustrol (Giraffa) Kustrol (Giraffa)
__label__avk Idulugal ~ Der Sommer (DE) Idulugal ( germanavon Der Sommer ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 71.4 × 103.6 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Caspar David Friedrich germanaf lingesik bak 1807. Bata trutca koe Neue Pinakothek tcila koe München koe Germana re ( 2018 ) tigir. Dere rupec Stragela |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Idulugal (trutca ke Friedrich) Idulugal (trutca ke Friedrich)
__label__avk Raporafa starka koe matela ke ropexe ke Saint-Paul ~ Stone Bench in the Garden of the Asylum (EN) Raporafa starka koe matela ke ropexe ke Saint-Paul ( englavon Stone Bench in the Garden of the Asylum ) tir trutca, i lavalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Vincent Van Gogh nederlandaf lingesik bak 05/1889 bal inafa jonvielera koe Saint-Rémy-de-Provence ( Franca ). Bata trutca koe Van Gogh tcila koe Amsterdam koe Nederlanda re ( 2022 ) tigir. Dere rupec Trutceem ke Van Gogh Stragela La Faille estova iku Hulsker : F 1537 ~ JH 1711 |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Raporafa starka koe matela ke ropexe ke Saint-Paul (2) (trutca ke Van Gogh) Raporafa starka koe matela ke ropexe ke Saint-Paul (2) (trutca ke Van Gogh)
__label__avk Bat teliz va kot debak bendeyen dene Tamavafa Gadakiewega ke UNESCO koe Botswana otular. Bak 2018, toloy debak ke Botswana tid ke winugafa vexala ke Tamavafa Gadakiewega : 1 arayaf is 1 tuwavaf. Winugafa vexala Vuestexa Tamavafa gadakiewega koe Botswana Tamavafa gadakiewega koe Botswana
__label__avk Murtoyom (Scotopelia) tir tani oxi ke Strigidae yasa vey Strigiformes veem. Gan Bonaparte bak 1850 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), 3 katca zo vertokad : Scotopelia bouvieri Scotopelia peli Scotopelia ussheri Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Scotopelia is Strigiformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Scotopelia is Strigiformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Scotopelia (Bonaparte, 1850) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Scotopelia (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Scotopelia (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Scotopelia (en) vuest- : NCBI : Scotopelia (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Scotopelia Murtoyom (Scotopelia) Murtoyom (Scotopelia) Murtoyom (Scotopelia) Murtoyom (Scotopelia)
__label__avk Ayikye bosolase va nimat ~ Homme s'essuyant la jambe (FR) Ayikye bosolase va nimat ( francavon Homme s'essuyant la jambe ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 100 × 125 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Gustave Caillebotte francaf lingesik bak 1884. Bata trutca koe korikaf dotay re ( 2018 ) tigir. Watsa va lebaca Watsa va lebaca va Gustave Caillebotte remi trelafa klepa koswavayar. Ine va konaka trutca oku siatos lingeyer. Tulon grupet : Dere rupec Stragela Vuestexa |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Ayikye bosolase va nimat (trutca ke Caillebotte) Ayikye bosolase va nimat (trutca ke Caillebotte)
__label__avk Taya dem tsage ~ Field with Poppies (EN) Taya dem tsage ( englavon Field with Poppies ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 71 × 91 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Vincent Van Gogh nederlandaf lingesik bak 06/1889 bal inafa jonvielera koe Saint-Rémy-de-Provence ( Franca ). Bata trutca koe Kunsthalle tcila koe Bremen koe Germana re ( 2022 ) tigir. Dere rupec Trutceem ke Van Gogh Stragela La Faille estova iku Hulsker : F 581 ~ JH 1751 |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Taya dem tsage (1) (trutca ke Van Gogh) Taya dem tsage (1) (trutca ke Van Gogh)
__label__avk { "type": "Feature", "geometry": { "type": "Point", "coordinates": [-73.05063, 6.986407] }, "properties": { "title": "Piedecuesta", "description": "", "marker-symbol": "marker", "marker-size": "small", "marker-color": "0050d0" } } Teza Debalas liwot
__label__avk Surbol (Ourebia) tir tani moukolafi oxi vey Bovidae yasa ( Antilopinae volveyyasa ) ke ARTIODACTYLA veem. Gan Laurillard bak 1842 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bati oxi tir tankatcafi : |- | 1 | Surbol (Ourebia ourebi) | Ourebia ourebi (Zimmermann, 1783) | | |} Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Ourebia (Laurillard, 1842) (en) vuest- : CITES : Ourebia (en) vuest- : UICN : oxi Ourebia (Laurillard, 1842) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Ourebia (Laurillard, 1842) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Ourebia (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Ourebia (Laurillard, 1842) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Ourebia (Laurillard, 1842) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Ourebia (en) vuest- : NCBI : Ourebia Ara vuestexa Surbol (Ourebia) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Surbol (Ourebia) Surbol (Ourebia) Surbol (Ourebia)
__label__avk Mazol (Callicebus medemi) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Callicebus oxi ( Torquatus volveyoxi ) vey Pitheciidae yasa ( Callicebinae volveyyasa ) ke PRIMATES veem ( HAPLORRHINI volveyveem, SIMIIFORMES tolvolveyveem ). Gan Hershkovitz bak 1963 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Callicebus medemi (Hershkovitz, 1963) (en) vuest- : CITES : Callicebus medemi (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Callicebus medemi (Hershkovitz, 1963) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Callicebus medemi (Hershkovitz, 1963) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Callicebus medemi (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Callicebus medemi (Hershkovitz, 1963) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Callicebus medemi (Hershkovitz, 1963) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Callicebus medemi (en) vuest- : NCBI : Callicebus medemi Ara vuestexa Mazol (Callicebus medemi) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Mazol (Callicebus medemi) Mazol (Callicebus medemi) Mazol (Callicebus medemi)
__label__avk Léon-Victor Dupré ba 18/06/1816 koe Limoges koe Franca kobliyir. Ba 31/10/1879 koe Paris awalkeyer. Tiyir patectoyaf lingesik ke Barbizon serna. Tiyir berikye ke Jules Dupré dere tise patectoyaf lingesik. Blirizva Yona trutca Dere rupec Dupré (Léon-Victor) Dupré (Léon-Victor)
__label__avk { "type": "Feature", "geometry": { "type": "Point", "coordinates": [-75.788057, 2.063867] }, "properties": { "title": "Altamira (Huila)", "description": "", "marker-symbol": "marker", "marker-size": "small", "marker-color": "0050d0" } } Teza Debalas liwot
__label__avk Werpol (Myosciurus) tir tani moukolafi oxi vey Sciuridae yasa ( Xerinae volveyyasa ) ke RODENTIA veem ( SCIUROMORPHA volveyveem ). Gan Thomas bak 1909 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bati oxi tir tankatcafi : |- | 1 | Werpol (Myosciurus pumilio) | Myosciurus pumilio (Le Conte, 1857) | | |} Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Myosciurus (Thomas, 1909) (en) vuest- : CITES : Myosciurus (en) vuest- : UICN : oxi Myosciurus (Thomas, 1909) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Myosciurus (Thomas, 1909) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Myosciurus (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Myosciurus (Thomas, 1909) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Myosciurus (Thomas, 1909) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Myosciurus (en) vuest- : NCBI : Myosciurus Ara vuestexa Werpol (Myosciurus) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Werpol (Myosciurus) Werpol (Myosciurus) Werpol (Myosciurus)
__label__avk Vimkol (Sylvisorex isabellae) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Sylvisorex oxi vey Soricidae yasa ( Crocidurinae volveyyasa ) ke SORICOMORPHA veem. Gan Heim de Balsac bak 1968 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Sylvisorex isabellae (Heim de Balsac, 1968) (en) vuest- : CITES : Sylvisorex isabellae (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Sylvisorex isabellae (Heim de Balsac, 1968) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Sylvisorex isabellae (Heim de Balsac, 1968) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Sylvisorex isabellae (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Sylvisorex isabellae (Heim de Balsac, 1968) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Sylvisorex isabellae (Heim de Balsac, 1968) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Sylvisorex isabellae (en) vuest- : NCBI : Sylvisorex isabellae Ara vuestexa Vimkol (Sylvisorex isabellae) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Vimkol (Sylvisorex isabellae) Vimkol (Sylvisorex isabellae) Vimkol (Sylvisorex isabellae)
__label__avk Adrien de Gerlache de Gomery ( 1866-1934 ) ~ Belgaf vestasik va Antarktika Adrien de Gerlache tiyir kotgrupaf belgaf totasik isu vestasik bak tena ke 19-eafa decemda isu toza ke 20-eafa. Vestara va Antarktika is fentugalura bak 1897. |} Gerlache (Adrien) Gerlache (Adrien)
__label__avk Severnaya Milva ( rossiavon Северная Мылва ) tir rossiafa kuksa valente europafa Rossia, koe Komi Sokasane, taltefa kovoa ke Petcora bost. Inafe abrotce tir vas 213 km- isen kuksaxo tir vas 5 970 km². Dere rupel Severnaya Milva (kuksa) Severnaya Milva (kuksa)
__label__avk Paul de Camondo ~ Paul de Camondo (FR) Paul de Camondo ( francavon Paul de Camondo ) tir trutca lumkirafa gu 73 × 92 cm-, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Henri Lebasque francaf lingesik bak 1909. Bata trutca koe korikaf dotay re ( 2018 ) tigir. Dere rupec Stragela Xantaza dene internet ok internetxo |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Paul de Camondo (trutca ke Lebasque) Paul de Camondo (trutca ke Lebasque)
__label__avk Vesnol (Neoromicia melckorum) tir tana moukolafa katca ke Neoromicia oxi vey Vespertilionidae yasa ( Vespertilioninae volveyyasa ) ke CHIROPTERA veem. Gan Roberts bak 1919 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), bata katca tir aptiskafa. Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Neoromicia melckorum (Roberts, 1919) (en) vuest- : CITES : Neoromicia melckorum (en) vuest- : UICN : katca Neoromicia melckorum (Roberts, 1919) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Neoromicia melckorum (Roberts, 1919) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Neoromicia melckorum (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Neoromicia melckorum (Roberts, 1919) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Neoromicia melckorum (Roberts, 1919) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Neoromicia melckorum (en) vuest- : NCBI : Neoromicia melckorum Ara vuestexa Vesnol (Neoromicia melckorum) dene Wikispecies Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Vesnol (Neoromicia melckorum) Vesnol (Neoromicia melckorum) Vesnol (Neoromicia melckorum)
__label__avk Zertekum (Graydidascalus) tir tani oxi ke Psittacidae yasa vey Psittaciformes veem. Gan Bonaparte bak 1854 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem katceem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), bati oxi tir tankatcafi : Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Graydidascalus is Psittaciformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Graydidascalus is Psittaciformes (en) vuest- : UICN : Graydidascalus (Bonaparte, 1854) (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Graydidascalus (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Graydidascalus (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Graydidascalus (en) vuest- : NCBI : Graydidascalus (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Graydidascalus Zertekum (Graydidascalus) Zertekum (Graydidascalus) Zertekum (Graydidascalus) Zertekum (Graydidascalus)
__label__avk Nefasatol (Tragulus kanchil penangensis) tir tana moukolafa apta ke kanchil katca vey Tragulus oxi vey Tragulidae yasa ke ARTIODACTYLA veem. Gan Kloss bak 1918 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem milkatcaf apteem Sedme Mammal Species of the World (siatos ke 2005), konakara apta dere tid ke mila veyafa katca : Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Mammal Species of the World (v- 3, 2005) : Tragulus kanchil penangensis (Kloss, 1918) (en) vuest- : CITES : Tragulus kanchil penangensis (en) vuest- : UICN : apta Tragulus kanchil penangensis (Kloss, 1918) (en, fr) vuest- : ITIS : Tragulus kanchil penangensis (Kloss, 1918) (en) vuest- : Tree of Life Web Project : Tragulus kanchil penangensis (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Tragulus kanchil penangensis (Kloss, 1918) (en) vuest- : Paleobiology Database : Tragulus kanchil penangensis (Kloss, 1918) (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Tragulus kanchil penangensis (en) vuest- : NCBI : Tragulus kanchil penangensis Kotavafa vuestesa xantaza Kotava winugaf moukolaf ravlemak (Kotava, Latinava, 2019) Nefasatol (Tragulus kanchil penangensis) Nefasatol (Tragulus kanchil penangensis) Nefasatol (Tragulus kanchil penangensis)
__label__avk Julayot (Viduidae) tir tana yasa ke Passeriformes veem. Gan Cabanis bak 1841 taneon zo pimtayar. Vexala dem oxieem Sedme vuestesa pulara ke Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba ( 2.2 siatos, 2009 ), 2 oxi zo vertokad : |- | 1 | Julayot (Vidua) | Vidua (Cuvier, 1816) | | |- | 2 | Julayot (Anomalospiza) | Anomalospiza (Shelley, 1901) | | |} Pulasa vuestexa is xantaza (en) vuest- : Walvedeyafa Zveriopafa Aba : Viduidae is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : Alan P. Peterson : Viduidae is Passeriformes (en) vuest- : Fauna Europaea : Viduidae (en) vuest- : Animal Diversity Web : Viduidae (en) vuest- : Catalogue of Life : Viduidae (en) vuest- : NCBI : Viduidae (fr+en) vuest- : CITES : Viduidae Julayot (Viduidae) Julayot (Viduidae) Julayot (Viduidae) Julayot (Viduidae)
__label__avk Yalestaca dem anoz is pruve is wikande ~ Stilleben med krukke, eple, valnøtt og kokosnøtt (NO) Yalestaca dem anoz is pruve is wikande ( norgavon Stilleben med krukke, eple, valnøtt og kokosnøtt ) tir trutca, i puntalingeks keve stama skuyun gan Edvard Munch norgaf lingesik bak 1881. Bata trutca koe Munch tcila koe Oslo koe Norga re ( 2018 ) tigir. Watsa va yalestaca Remi klepapa, Edvard Munch va konaka trutca ok konak siatos ke mila trutca watson gu yalestaca lingeyer. Lana tid grupepena. Dere rupec Stragela |style="vertical-align: top;"| |} Yalestaca dem anoz is pruve is wikande (trutca ke Munch) Yalestaca dem anoz is pruve is wikande (trutca ke Munch)
__label__avk In tir Great Britain wideyik.
__label__avk Nope mwa va rin sopé !
__label__avk Bagala anton tir yolt ta rinaf rokleem.
__label__avk Me tí rinafe nazbeikye.
__label__avk Toklize tir ark ke iyeltakeem ?
__label__avk Va kontan ko kwitaxo gowí.
__label__avk Me tí rinafa nazbeikya.
__label__avk Vay, lovion lapulvil !
__label__avk Sin va min kotafizcekon kobasid.
__label__avk Lava is opra tid mildororafa vox memiltazukafa.
__label__avk Gildeson va bata danka va rin trakú nume gracel.
__label__avk Va gavera pará !
__label__avk Sin fu mallaniyid viele artlaniyí.
__label__avk Pu rin walté da waveon pití.
__label__avk In va trutca bene rebava lingeyer.
__label__avk In narmon tiyir flintik.
__label__avk Konaktan tid rotaf.
__label__avk Va guazaf nik gamdayá.
__label__avk Tce roklel !
__label__avk Ale ilkaca.
__label__avk Tarkasaf gu jin til !
__label__avk Ten zolonikul !
__label__avk Kas kalil da tí rotuxasik ?
__label__avk Va kotcoba ta pomara askití !
__label__avk Toloya razeka moe azega tigid.
__label__avk Kotkase va taneaf siatos abdualbá.
__label__avk Kaliapon grupujé.
__label__avk Proyik va jin brazar vexe lokaliaf tí.
__label__avk Yontan waveon gazdon me djukaranyad.
__label__avk Kivara va arga sotir antafa skalera va kobara
__label__avk Sin tce gaveted.
__label__avk Ta rinafa vinura mekon rovekalí.
__label__avk Toktel lokiewon star, gadikye ok gadikya ?
__label__avk Kas va talgeem nujnanyal ?
__label__avk Aftuca sotir doluca ke suterotik
__label__avk Va tokcoba ?
__label__avk Toktan va jin poral ?
__label__avk Nimat va jin rotesir.
__label__avk In nukenibeyer voxe en al awalkeyer.
__label__avk Inafa kalira tir ageltafa.
__label__avk Va porma gitucuá.
__label__avk Gaara tir gorestaca.
__label__avk Voxe dure, va tokcoba askit ?
__label__avk Me tir velajikya.
__label__avk In en dun kobar.
__label__avk Keyul, edeme tori ironokaf impadimak di gavel.
__label__avk Grufa ayikya va jinafa klokera gonisker.
__label__avk Bate vage tori in tid trelarsafe.
__label__avk Gaara loon tir dam anton taveranya.
__label__avk In va neva loote digir.
__label__avk Va sokaj pará !
__label__avk Ayikya va klaa kotviele pulvir voxe me sokalir.
__label__avk Ten usukimpal !
__label__avk Kontan gopulvir !
__label__avk Va francik lodam germanik albar.
__label__avk Va jinafa taka ten tuloral !
__label__avk Pu in dimzilil !
__label__avk Man luksam.
__label__avk Vay, kas va eip rodeal ?
__label__avk Va geltsuteksaj pará !
__label__avk Twitter bolk vol tir nik.
__label__avk Ale batcoba.
__label__avk Batcoba va jin tudaavapar.
__label__avk Kotvielon sumewit.
__label__avk Icde batcoba, toka gorara ?
__label__avk Riapaf tulok.
__label__avk Tce ar vukudeem.
__label__avk Fu tir blinazbalugal.
__label__avk Va kotafa ageltuca vols antafa ageltuca me kalil
__label__avk Bata orpa tir adalafa gu Amerika.
__label__avk Folí da in al rokler.
__label__avk Fentugalon va zveri gosinkat !
__label__avk Va karvol ten aliel !
__label__avk Va int gu inya me al rovodatoé.
__label__avk Sinkaransa va in duxar.
__label__avk Inafa takra lulanon gandiyir.
__label__avk In meldason zo bakayar.
__label__avk In djukoyayar.
__label__avk Ayikye drager voxe ayikya deraykar.
__label__avk Tey va sanoya mona tuguboyayar.
__label__avk Va tokcoba en gildal ?
__label__avk Va bata stutera di getcú ?
__label__avk Belcon berpotut.
__label__avk Dotrakupú.
__label__avk Toklize va neva rolusté ?
__label__avk Ba kalina sira, bam volsira.
__label__avk Battode, tokdume ?
__label__avk Va funyera va rin pará !
__label__avk Ayik tir sulem grutrakus, konakviele va awalk
__label__avk Va ageltuca kontomon kalil enide rotuxason di zo folitil
__label__avk Konaktan tid arges maneke bad aluboy verast va vielcek sodrasú
__label__avk In tuke jontika kobara is frepe ta arientura al tukulawer.
__label__avk Ranyason gazdon, setikenyel loeke blira is gandira is kaluca tid gogolap.
__label__avk Va ayikya gu myotiskaf sulemany dem aneyapana alma yoltat
__label__avk Konaktan kured anton enide va ayikya djukuretes va artan levweyonad.
__label__avk Koe tela loswavikya, kotviele bonikya meviele modesa tir.
__label__jbo ni'o lo arseniko goi ko'a cu ratni li 33 li 74pi92160 fi'o sinxa la'o xy. As xy. gi'e sorkrilimo'a xabjinme ralju steci gundi terpilno jmive terpilno citri terkunra teryratni kanro joi javni steci selratni xabjinme sligu
__label__jbo le si'o masti cu gradu lo veldetri lo niltei seki'i lo zu'o la lunra cu carna la terdi kei terdikni po'u 29piji'i53 djetei i lo na'artei cu masti li 12boi so'a veldetri ni'o dei liste lo'i masti seldei vede'i la gregori,an i la pavma'i cu djedi li 31 i la relma'i cu djedi li 28 fa'u 29 ca lo cnano fa'u djeze'a na'artei i la cibma'i cu djedi li 31 i la vonma'i cu djedi li 30 i la mumyma'i cu djedi li 31 i la xavma'i cu djedi li 30 i la zelma'i cu djedi li 31 i la bivma'i cu djedi li 31 i la sozma'i cu djedi li 30 i la pavnonma'i cu djedi li 31 i la pavypavma'i cu djedi li 30 i la pavrelma'i cu djedi li 31 masti
__label__jbo ni'o la roltrusi'o zei.kongos. goi ko'a zi'e no'u la .kongos. zei ke roltrusi'o gubyseltru no'u la'o fy République Démocratique du Congo fy cu midju friko gugde i ko'a se cmene la'o zoi Zaire zoi ca le 1971moi ku bi'o le 1997moi gugde frikytu'a
__label__jbo la lojbangirz. no'u lu logji bangu girzu li'u zi'e no'u la'o gy. The Logical Language Group, Inc. .gy. cu naldinselprali bende fo lo nu selfu lo se nitcu be lo lojbo cecmu .i zasti co'a lo 1987moi gi'e jatna lo nunfarvi be lo lojbo bangu .i se cmima 26 prenu ca lo 2006moi lojbangirz
__label__jbo ni'o la .gnus. goi ko'a je no'u la'o gy. GNU .gy. samcmu te ci'e lo zifre samtci po'o .i le ko'a cmene cu se smuni lu la .gnus. na .uniks. li'u .i tu'a ko'a se cfagau la .ritcard. .stalman. skami sazyci'e gynus
__label__jbo ni'o le remske cu saske le remna .i le remske cu mulno ki'u le du'u ry srana le si'o ro da remna kei .e le du'u le remske cu srana le si'o ro da jinzi remna .i ni'o le di'e remske pagbu liste .i ni'o jmive remske ni'o kulnu remske ni'o bangu remske ni'o stali remske
__label__jbo ni'o lo .alzaitu cu tricu la'o ly. Olea europaea .ly. gi'e se krasi lo stuna korbi be la tumselsru xamsi be'o .e lo berti be la .iRAN be'o noi korbi la kaspian .i lo .alzaitu cu grute ji'a ru .i lo .alzaitu cu vajni lo nu vecnu lo ka rasygrute ni'o lo .alzaitu xrula cu se rulpezli voda gi'eku'i se nakstani reda .i la'edi'u cnano fi la'o ly. Oleaceae .ly .i lo grute cu drupepa gi'e miltre li 10 bi'i 25 .i crepu loi .alzaitu ca lo nu crino .ijonai denpa lo nu xekyzirpu gi'e makcu lo nu crepu grute
__label__jbo ni'o la tciles goi ko'a zi'e no'u lu tciles. zei gubyseltru li'u no'u la'o sy República de Chile sy cu snanu ketco gugde ne'u la perus du'a la pasifik. zei braxamsi vu'a la getygu'e be'a la ziptu'a .i ko'a se trutcadu la santiagos. pe la tciles. gugde ketytu'a la'ortu'a tciles
__label__jbo ni'o 25 la vomast. cu 25moi djedi fi'o masti la vomast. noi ke'a cu vomoi masti .i 24 la vomast. cu purlamdei .ije 26 la vomast. cu bavlamdei fasnu ni'o di'e cu liste lo fasnu de'i 25 la vomast. .i jbena ni'o di'e cu liste lo jbena de'i 25 la vomast. .i ... mrobi'o ni'o di'e cu liste lo mrobi'o de'i 25 la vomast. .i ... vonma'i djedi
__label__jbo lo befsraku no'u zoi py. 切腹 .py. goi ko'a cu tadji lo nu sezycatra .i ko'a pu se pilno lo ponjo soncrsamurai ni'o ca lo befsraku lo prenu cu gasnu lo nu lo cladakyxa'i .a lo dakfu cu sraku lo betfu be py. ponjo kulnu
__label__jbo la pacruxydinj goi ko'a cu skami selkei zilcmi fi'ela konamis .i lonu le pamoi pacruxydinj no'u zoi py. 悪魔城ドラキュラ py. pu selpra de'i li pi'epi'e pasobixa vecu'u la fydysyskam e la mysyxyskam cu krasi ko'a .i ko'a cfika lo terbradi be lai belmont bei la drakul samselkei
__label__jbo la'o zoi. Huang Xianfan .zoi (to jbena fi li 13 pi'e 11 pi'e 1899 gi'e mrobi'o de'i li 18 pi'e 1 pi'e 1982 toi) cu jugygu'e cirskepre. bartu skucripu www.china.com.cn www.youdaxue.com www.rauz.net jungo prenu
__label__jbo ni'o la .euklides. goi ko'a zi'e no'u la'o xy Εὐκλείδης xy no'u la .euklides. pe la .aleksandrias. pu xelso cmacypre gi'e so'eroi se cmene le patfu be le caltaicmaci .i ko'a pu jmive vi la .aleksandiras. ca leza'i la .ptolemaios. turni .i lai jicmu pe ko'a zi'e goi ko'e du le traji se jinga saske cukta gi'e me lo traji vajni cukta pe le citri pe le cmaci .i ko'e cukta lonu lai .euklides.zei caltaicmaci cu se lojycpa fi lo tordu porsi be loi .aksioma .i ko'a ji'a ciska loi cukta be lo konju kruvi .e lo bolci caltaicmaci .e lo namcu cmaci .e so'i drata e'u tcidu euklidi tamcmaci cmacypre xelso prenu
__label__jbo fasnu ni'o di'e cu liste le fasnu de'i lo 1993moi .i de'i 1 la pamast. cu sepli la'o zoi. Czechoslovakia zoi. la'o zoi. Slovakia zoi. .e la'o zoi. Czech Republic zoi. jbena ni'o di'e cu liste le jbena de'i lo 1993moi .i de'i lo 11moi kanbyma'i bo djedi la'o gy. Flora Cross gy. noi ke'a cu merko skina xeldraci cu jbena mrobi'o ni'o di'e cu liste le mrobi'o de'i lo 1993moi .i de'i lo 20moi kanbyma'i bo djedi la'o zoi. Audrey Hepburn zoi. noi ke'a cu skina xeldraci fi'o veljbe la'o zoi. Belgium zoi. cu mrobi'o to jbena filo 1929moi toi nanca
__label__jbo ni'o lo lurcmu goi ko'a cu ratni li 34 li 78pi96 fi'o sinxa la'o xy. Se xy. gi'e cafgrusi je gusyga'edicfle naljinme ralju steci gundi terpilno jmive terpilno citri terkunra teryratni kanro joi javni steci selratni naljinme sligu
__label__jbo la kreg.tomson. goi ko'a cu misno ke merko telylisxra je velylisxra .i ko'a jbena tu'i la micigyn .i ko'a se vercedra tu'i lo nurma be la viskynsin .i ko'a finti la'o zoi. Blankets zoi. goi ko'e .i ko'e lisxra lo nunji'e be ko'a merko prenu
__label__jbo ni'o lo sakta goi ko'a cu lanzu file titla tsapidja gi'e blabi krili sligu .i le satlanzu cu selcmi le pamei satygri .e le remei satygri xukmi ni'o ko'a cu sampu tabjoldro linsi ratygri fi'o vasru le kijytabdro girzu .a le kijytabno girzu gi'e vasru le kijytabno remei xumdiclu'i ja'e ledu'u ko'a cu kamxumfra .i so'e le sakta selxu'i cu selcmi mapti le xumyme'o no'u la'o xy. (CH2O)n xy. to ny cmima lo'i kacna'u toi sakta tsapijda selxu'i sidju gismu
__label__jbo ni'o lo manri febybi'o nejni goi ko'a cu glanejni seltcu le me la .mol. marji klani le febvi ja lunsa ni'o ca le glanejni vimcu befile gapci be'o pruce le marji cu stodi jdika lo kelvo .ijeku'ibo ca lemu'e le marji kelvo cu dunli le marji selylunsa kei le dukse glanejni vimcu cau le kelvo jdika cu seltcu lenu le marji cu lunsa .i le dukse glanejni nitcu cu dunli ko'a .isi'a ca le glanejni jmina befile litki be'o pruce le marji cu stodi zenba lo kelvo .ijeku'ibo ca lemu'e le marji selfebvi kei le dukse glanejni jmina cau le kelvo jdika cu seltcu lenu le marji cu febvi .ije le dukse glanejni nitcu cu dunli ko'a .i ba lenu le mairtcini cu binxo le kelvo cu stodi binxo ni'o ko'a cu nitcu lenu porpi lo binselxu'i xumki terkruca ca le nunfebvi .a lenu zbasu lo binselxu'i xumki terkruca ca le nunlunsa xumselkai
__label__jbo ni'o lo glanejni sroka'e goi ko'a cu marji ckaji leka lenu kelvo binxo kei cu stika le glanejni sorcu .i ko'a cu terfancu fe le maimre .e le mairkai .e le glanejni tadji .i le majmrezi'e glanejni sroka'e cu frinu le glanejni sroka'e le maimre xumselkai
__label__jbo ni'o la uuxan goi ko'a zi'e no'u la'o xy 武汉 xy .e la'o xy 武漢 xy cu trutca la .ubeis. poi gugypau gi'e traji se xabju tcadu vi lo midju be la jungo ke prenu gubyseltru .i ko'a se stuzi vu'e la .djiangan. zei pitytu'a .e le te kruca be la .djang. zei .tses. zei rirxe ku bei la .xan. zei rirxe jungo tcadu tcadu
__label__jbo ni'o le solri ciste goi ko'a cu ciste fi le solri goi ko'e ge'u .e lo kensa dacti poi se jongau le ko'e majda'e ku'o noi se krasi lo farlu nu gunma binxo pe lo brabra xumsle pu lo 4pi6 ki'oki'oki'o nanca .i le dacti girzu pe ko'e cu srumu'u ko'e .i lo nenri plini cu du la .merkurios. ce la .venus. ce le terdi ce la .mars. .ije lo bartu plini cu du la .iupiter. ce la .saturn. ce la .uranos. ce la .neptun.
__label__jbo la galileos. galileis. no'u la'o zoi. Galileo Galilei zoi. goi ko'a cu termu'eskepre je cmacypre je pijyskepre je kesyskepre mivycitri ni'o ko'a jbena li 1564 pi'e 2 pi'e 15 boi pe vede'i lo latmo veldetri pe la iulius.kaisar. ge'u fo la .italias. gi'e mrobi'o li 1642 pi'e 1 pi'e 8 boi pe vede'i lo latmo veldetri pe la pap.gregorius. kesyske ni'o ko'a xagzengau lo pilno befi lenu zgana lo kensa .iseni'ibo ko'a facki vo lo vajni mluni la iupiter .i ko'a darlu lesi'o lo solri cu midju lo munje kei lesi'o lo terdi cu midju lo munje termu'eske ko'a xusra ledu'u lo kamsutra pe lo farlu dacti na lacri le junta skepre termu'eskepre cmacypre pijyskepre kesyskepre italias. zei prenu
__label__jbo ni'o la .iran. goi ko'a zi'e no'u va'i la poi muslo gubyseltru ku'o .iran. se stuzi lo stici pagbu be lo xazdo bratu'a .i zoi fy. جمهوری اسلامی ايران fy. no'u va'i zoi fy. djomxUri,ie eslAmi,ie irAn .fy. cmene ko'a bau lo banrfarsi poi gugbau ko'a i ko'a se berti se korbi fi la .xaiastAn. .e la .azrbaidjAn. .e la tiurkmenistAn .e la poi lalxu ku'o kaspis .i ko'a se stuna se korbi fi la kisygu'e e la .afyganisTAN. .i ko'a se stici se korbi fi la turk .e la raksygu'e .i ko'a se snanu se korbi fi la .fars. poi zbani .i la .te'erAn. ralju je trugunma tcadu gugde zdotu'a iran
__label__jbo ni'o la ba'e makax go'i ko'a cu tcadu lo djogu'e .ije censa tcadu le muslo lijda .i ko'a nenri la ka,bas .i la muxamad jbena fo ko'a ni'o re ki'o ki'o lo prenu cu xabju ko'a .ije ku'i lonu vo ki'o ki'o lo prenu vitke ko'a cu dikni fi le se nanca .i tolcru lenu le na'e muslo klama ne'i ko'a tcadu djogu'e muslo
__label__jbo ni'o la .romas. goi ko'a zi'e no'u la'o .ibu Roma .ibu cu trutca be la .italias. gi'e traji barda je se xabju tcadu .i se xabju 3pi45ki'oki'o prenu gi'e se nilsefta 1pi285 pitki'otre .i ko'a se stuzi lo midju stici be le italias.zei tolbrazbani vi le .tiber.zei rirxe ni'o le tcadu pu melo traji vilpa je vajni tcadu gi'e se xabju lo latmo nolraitru ca lo latmo sosygugje'a .i le tcadu cu ji'a vajni lo xriso citri gi'e se zdani le katolikas.zei be'ejda .e le .vatikan.zei tcadu italias trutca
__label__jbo ni'o la .bagdad. goi ko'a zi'e no'u la'o rabybau بغداد‎ Baġdād rabybau cu trutca la raksygu'e .e le .bagdad.zei seltru .i ko'a se xabju 7pi'e5 ki'oki'o prenu gi'e barda traji tcadu fo la raksygu'e gi'e remoi barda traji fo le xrabo munje to la .kairos. pamoi toi ni'o se stuzi la .tigris.zei rirxe gi'e pu zasti ca le 7xyxy moi ku gi'e pu ralju tcadu vi le muslo munje raksygu'e trutca
__label__jbo ni'o lo jinmrgadolini goi ko'a cu ratni li 65 li 158pi92535 fi'o sinxa la'o xy. Gd xy. gi'e ploke'a je cilzbaka'e je ranti je rijblabi jinme ralju steci gundi terpilno jmive terpilno citri terkunra teryratni kanro joi javni steci selratni cnobinjinkle jinkle ligykle
__label__jbo la'o zoi. Berlin .zoi goi ko'a raltca la dotygu'e .i ko'a se xabju ji'i ci ki'o vonono ki'o prenu .i la .berlin. cu vipsi be la dotygu'e be'o gugde raltca vipsi be la dotygu'e be'o gugde tcadu fi la dotygu'e dotygu'e
__label__jbo ni'o lo merko jecta vlile binxo fasnu cu jecta vlile binxo fasnu fi'o mulno le za'i le brito nolraitru turni cu turni lo paci ragve xamsi jecta kei .e le nu finti le cabna mergu'e .i gligu'e citri mergu'e citri citri
__label__jbo ni'o lo .efklidi tamcmaci cu cmaci ciste fi'e la .euklides. noi misro je kluxelso cmacypre ni'o di'e jicmu flalu ci'e lo .efklidi tamcmaci .i ro da poi mokca ku'o ro de poi mokca gi'e na du da ku'o pa di zo'u di sirli'i da ce de ro sirli'ispisa ka'e binxo lo cimni sirli'i roda poi sirli'ispisa ku'o rode poi jipno da zo'u di cukla fi'o midju de fi'o xilgarna da ro kurjga cu tamdu'i ro kurjga ge re lo linji cu kruca lo ci moi gi lo simsumji be lo nenri jganu pe lo mlana cu mleca lo re kurjga .i se ni'i bo lo bi'u nai re linji va'o lo nu banzu preja cu kucysi'u lo bi'u nai mlana cmaci
__label__jbo ni'o lo gugdrsu,omi goi ko'a zi'e no'u la'e lu .suomis. zei gubyseltru li'u zi'e no'u la'o sy. Republiken Finland .sy. zi'e no'u la'o sy. Suomen tasavalta .sy. berti ropno gugde .i ko'a se jecybau la'o sy. suomi .sy. .e lo bangrsferi .i so'a lo xabju be ko'a cu se bangu lo bangrsuomi .i so'e le go'i cu se verclibau lo bangrsuomi .iku'i lo'e xabju be la nederland. cu se bangu lo bangrsferi ni'o la .xelsinkis. ko'a trutca gi'e raltca gugde rontu'a gugdrsu,omi
__label__jbo lo zinki goi ko'a cu ratni li 30 li 65.409 ralju ckaji lo zinki cu mlifra blablabi jinme gi'e frati file cimvacri gi'e selfagri lo vacri fi'o skari lo camri'o gi'e curmi selyli'a le kijyjolzi'i gapci .i ko'a cu frati fi le slami .e le jilka .e le drata naljinme terpilno ni'o ko'a cu traji le zmadu befele cafne selpilno be'o le vomoi gi'e mleca le tirse .a le tunka .a le jinmrmalume le ka cafne selpilno .i di'e cu liste le cafne terpilno befele zinki ni'o ko'a cu selpilno filenu ko'a cu bandu befilenu kijyfra be'o calku lo gasta ni'o ko'a cu selpilno filenu ko'a cu bandu befilenu kijyfra be'o setybi'o bo calku lo gasta ni'o ko'a cu selpilno filedu'u le lastu .a le nikle rijno .a le prina jinme .a le vrici jinme terjo'e mixre cu jimxre ko'a ni'o ko'a cu ralju jinme nenri lo merko fepni ba le 1982moi ni'o ko'a cu selpilno filenu litki jinme tamsu'a fi'o ralju nenri le karce zbasu gundi citri jmive terpilno stuzi bo krasi je selcafne zinki terkunra je pruce jimxre selku'i veljmina teryratni xukmi vindu ckaji selratni jinme gismu
__label__jbo lo krilytabno goi ko'a cu krili lo tabno ni'oni'o ckaji ni'o lo krilytabno cu traji lo ka jdari kei fo lo ro rarna dacti .i ku'i lo rutni zmadu be fi lo ka jdari cu zasti .i ji'a ko'a ralci .i lo sutra nundarxi cu se sumki lo nu porpi ni'oni'o pilno ni'o lo krilytabno cu se vamji lo mutce fo lo nu jemna ni'o ki'u lo nu jdari kei lo krilytabno cu xamgu lonu balre te pilno .i lo krilytabno balre cu ze'u kinli kunra jemna
__label__jbo ni'o le gerna cu tadni le javni seca'i lo bangu pilno .i le nu lo ciste javni cu catni le bangu cu selcmene le bangu gerna .i ja'e ro lo bangu gerna cu frica ro lo drata bangu gerna .i le gerna cu pagbu le bauske ni'o lo cabycedra gerna seltadni cu vasru lo vokygenske .e lo rafske .e lo genlalske gerna klesi ni'o lo javni krinu pilno gerna cu catni lo gerna pilno ni'o lo skicu gerna cu skicu le za'i fatci gerna pilno gerna bauske
__label__jbo la .uinstyn. tcyrtcil. no'u la'o zoi. Winston Churchill .zoi goi ko'a cu brito gugja'a gi'e jbena li 30 pi'e 11 pi'e 1874 .i ca lenu 2moi ke terdi nunjamna ko'a truja'a lo ritygu'e gi'e damba lo dotygu'e gugja'a ci'arfi'i brito prenu ritygu'e
__label__jbo ni'o la .paiton. goi ko'a zi'e no'u la'o glibau Python glibau cu kampu je sucta samplabau .i ko'a se finti fi loza'i ko'a frili se tcidu .i zo'e tavla fi ko'a secu'u lu la .paiton. cu vlipa je ponse be lo sampu genlalske .iji'a le samckuku'a cu barda je plixau samplabau
__label__jbo ni'o lo fangynavni goi ko'a cu ratni li 54 li 131pi293 fi'o sinxa la'o xy. Xe xy. gi'e causka je tilju je caursumne je tolfra gapci ralju steci gundi terpilno jmive terpilno citri terkunra teryratni kanro joi javni steci selratni ninkle naljinkle gackle
__label__jbo fasnu ni'o di'e cu liste le fasnu de'i lo 1917moi .i de'i lo relma'i 2moi la mergu'e cu co'u janso cikni la dotygu'e .i de'i lo cibma'i 15moi la zar po'u la 2moi.zei nikolys cu co'u nolraitru .i la rukygu'e cu binxo lo gubyseltru .i de'i lo pavypavma'i 7moi lo gunka girzu pe la .petrograd vi la rukygu'e cu daspo le .kerenskis.zei truci'e fi'o jatna la .lenin. i la .oktober.zei jecyga'ibai cu cfari .i jbena mrobi'o nanca
__label__jbo fi'o kansa lo fonxa cu kakne lo nu darno tavla .i lo fonxa cu velbe'i je terbe'i lo sance fi'o tadji lodu'u lo sance cu minji binxo lo dikca datni .e lodu'u lo dikca datni cu minji binxo lo sance .i lo dikca datni cu dikca klama lo fonxa minji birju je tcana .ijebabo dikca klama lo drata fonxa .i benji lo dikca datni fulo dikca cilta minji gismu
__label__jbo la baupla fuzykamni goi byfy cu kamni lo nu platu fi la .lojban. .i byfy fuzme lo nu banro lo selci'a co skicu be le lojbo te karbi kei .e lo nu cikre fi lo nu baupli mu'u lo ka na nabmi .i byfy co'a kamni ca lo 2002moi .i la .camgusmis. ca jatna byfy lojbangirz
__label__jbo ni'o lo tabno goi ko'a cu ratni li 6 li 12pi0107 fi'o sinxa la'o xy. C xy. gi'e soskrilimo'a je kampu je xekri jabo causka naljinme ralju steci gundi terpilno jmive terpilno citri terkunra teryratni kanro joi javni steci selratni naljinme sligu gismu
__label__jbo ni'o 21 la pamast. cu 21moi djedi fi'o masti la pamast. noi ke'a cu pamoi masti .i 20 la pamast. cu purlamdei .ije 22 la pamast. cu bavlamdei fasnu ni'o di'e cu liste lo fasnu de'i 21 la pamast. .i jbena ni'o di'e cu liste lo jbena de'i 21 la pamast. .i de'i lo 1338moi la'o zoi. Charles V of France zoi. noi ke'a cu noltrunau lo fasygu'e cu jbena to mrobi'o de'i lo 1380moi toi .i de'i lo 1793moi la'o zoi. Louis XVI of France zoi. noi ke'a cu noltrunau lo fasygu'e cu jbena to mrobi'o de'i lo 1754moi toi .i de'i lo 1827moi la'o zoi. Ivan Mikheevich Pervushin zoi. noi ke'a cu rusko cmacygau cu jbena to mrobi'o de'i lo 1900moi toi .i de'i lo 1829moi la'o zoi. Oscar II of Sweden zoi. noi ke'a cu noltrunau la'o zoi. Sweden zoi. cu jbena to mrobi'o de'i lo 1907moi toi mrobi'o ni'o di'e cu liste lo mrobi'o de'i 21 la pamast. .i de'i lo 1901moi la'o zoi. Elisha Gray zoi. noi ke'a cu merko ke minji finti gasnu cu mrobi'o to jbena filo 1835moi toi .i de'i lo 1950moi la'o zoi. George Orwell zoi. noi ke'a cu brito ckufi'igau cu mrobi'o to jbena filo 1903moi toi pavma'i djedi
__label__jbo ni'o lo jinmrnobeli goi ko'a cu ratni li 102 li 259 fi'o sinxa la'o xy. No xy. gi'e dirce je runti jinme ralju steci gundi terpilno jmive terpilno citri terkunra teryratni kanro joi javni steci selratni cnobinjinpoi jinme sligu
__label__jbo ni'o lo fasyjinme goi ko'a cu ratni li 31 li 69pi723 fi'o sinxa la'o xy. Ga xy. gi'e rirci je ranti je rijyska jbijinme ralju steci gundi terpilno jmive terpilno citri terkunra teryratni kanro joi javni steci selratni jbijinkle ligykle
__label__jbo la'o zoi. esperantos .zoi goi ko'a runbau gi'e ca traji le ka lo runbau cu se bangu .i fe ko'a finti fo lei bangu poi ropno ku'o fa la ludvik. ZAmenof. le nu sornai te bangu .i cmene fi ko'a fa la'o .sper. Esperanto .sper. .a la'o .sper. Esperanta lingvo .sper. .i so'o jbopli te cmene ko'a zo spero .i le cmene cu se krasi lo tolca'icme be ly zy be'o po'u la'o .sper. la doktoro esperanto .sper. noi se fanva fulo'u le mikce poi pacna le'u ni'o ni'o citri .i la ludvik. ZAmenof. finti la .esperant. ze'a le 188moi na'ardekto .i le pa moi gerna bo cukta cu fatri ca le 1887moi nandu kibypapri a, b, c Esperanto a,b,c Esperanto Esperanto-vortaro Radikoj-685 la .esperantomondos. .esperantos. zei girzu bangu runbau sornaibau
__label__jbo ni'o lo jinmrzirkoni goi ko'a cu ratni li 40 li 91pi224 fi'o sinxa la'o xy. Zr xy. gi'e rusblabi je tsali jinme fi'o simsa le jinmrtitani ralju steci gundi terpilno jmive terpilno citri terkunra teryratni kanro joi javni steci selratni jinme sligu
__label__jbo le daplu cu tumla to da'a braplu toi fi'o sruri le xamsi .a le lalxu .a le rirxe .i li ci cu ralju klesi le daplu le ka selcmene le braplu daplu .e le rirxe daplu .e le terdi spoja daplu .i le remna cu zbasu le rutni daplu .i le girzu ckini daplu cu selcmene le plugri .i tutske daplu gismu
__label__jbo ni'o la .axenaTEN. goi ko'a pu nolraitru le tcepru misrygu'e .i ko'a finti lo lijda be fi lo pa solri cevni .i ko'a speni la nefertitis. ni'o ko'a ze'i turni le misrygu'e .i ba le nu ko'a mrobi'o kei so'a krici be le lijda poi ko'a finti cu sisti lo za'i krici ni'o le larcu pe le pu'u ko'a turni cu rirci si'a .i le larcu zo'u ra'u finti lo remna pixra kai lo ka simlu lo ka fatci misrygu'e nolraitru
__label__jbo la bolivias. to bau le banrketcua cu cusku la'o ky Bulibiya Suyu ky .i bau le banrxaimara cu cusku la'o .abu Bulibiya .abu a la'o .abu Buliwya .abu toi goi ko'a zi'e no'u lu bolivias. zei sornai jecta li'u .a lu bolivias. zei gubyseltru li'u no'u la'o sy Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia sy .a la'o sy República de Bolivia sy cu ketco gugde gi'e zvati le midju stici be le ketytu'a gugde ketytu'a la'ortu'a bolivias
__label__jbo ni'o la .kamerun. goi ko'a zi'e no'u la .kamerun. zei gubyseltru no'u la'o fy République du Cameroun fy cu midju friko gugde .i ko'a lamji du'a la .nixerias. ne'uvu'e la .tcad. vu'e la midju friko gubyseltru .e la .gabon. be'a la .kongos. i le ko'a xaskoi cu se stuzi le .atlantik. zei braxamsi .esa'e le gineas. zei brazbani .i le galtu traji tumla cu se stuzi le snanu stici .i le ko'a barda traji tcadu du la .dou,alys. e la .djaundEs. e la .garuas. i la kamerun cu se zvati za'u 200 bangu .i ko'a misno ki'u le ko'a zgike .era'u la .makosas. e la .djaundEs. e la .garuas. iku'i le glibau .e le fasybau du le catni bangu gugde kamerun frikytu'a
__label__jbo lo kanguru cu claseljma je sralo ke se relcrade'i daskymabru la'o ly. Macropus .ly .i lo kanguru na'o plipe gi'e ka'e cadzu fi vo tuple .e lo rebla .i loi rixtuple cu na'o kansi'u .iku'i loi rixtuple be lo limna cu dutsi'u ni'o zo kanguru fu'ivla fo zoi zoi gangurru zoi lo bangrjimidiri .i de'i li 1770-08-04 la djeimyz.kuk. rejgau fi lo pruzvati ke sralo bangu valsi .i dy. viska lo nalterju'o danlu gi'e teryrei fi lu ti mo? li'u .i da dafsku zo kanguru .ibazabo de jajgau loi sralo bangu valsi .i lo drata cu valsi lo kanguru .i de sruma le du'u zoi zoi kanguru zoi se smuni lu mi na djuno li'u .a zo ki'a .iku'ibazabo facki lo du'u zoi zoi gangurru zoi valsi lo kanguru be di be'o .enai lo kanguru be rodi be'o lo bangrjimidiri noi diklo le stuzi poi la kuk. tolcliva sralo danlu
__label__jbo ni'o lo selfebvi goi ko'a cu kelvo sekai le ka le litki cu binxo le gapci ni'o lo nu febvi cu nu lo marji cu tcinybi'o .i febvi lo nilgla lo da'erfi'uplita ca lo nu lo gapci da'erfi'uplita be lo litki cu dunli lo vacri da'erfi'uplita .i lo ni lo gapci da'erfi'uplita cu zenba cu na'o panra lo ni lo nilgla cu zenba xumselkai gismu
__label__jbo ni'o lo jinmrdisprosi goi ko'a cu ratni li 66 li 162pi500 fi'o sinxa la'o xy. Dy xy. gi'e mliranti je rijyjinska jinme ralju steci gundi terpilno jmive terpilno citri terkunra teryratni kanro joi javni steci selratni cnobinjinkle jinkle ligykle
__label__jbo ni'o la dzipo braxamsi goi ko'a cu se cmima lo traji snanu xamsi be le terdi .i lo tutskepre cu na tugni lodu'u ma berti korbi be ko'a kei .a lodu'u ko'a zasti kei gi'e so'iroi jinvi le du'u ko'a cu pagbu be le snanu paskifik.zei braxamsi .a le snanu .atlantik.zei braxamsi .a le snanu xindo braxamsi braxamsi tutske
__label__jbo la mexygu'e xamsi goi ko'a cu pagbu le xamsi .i ko'a lamji la mergu'e. .e la mexygug. .e la kubas. vu'o noi gugde vi la .atlantik. zei xamsi ni'o la mexygu'e xamxi cu vajni filenu cupra loi rarna ctile xamsi
__label__jbo fasnu ni'o di'e cu liste le fasnu de'i lo 1807moi .i de'i lo 6moi matsi'uma'i bo djedi la'o py. Lisbon py. ne'i lo portygu'e cu stuzi lenu tedydesku jbena ni'o di'e cu liste le jbena de'i lo 1807moi .i de'i lo 19moi kanbyma'i bo djedi la'o gy. Robert E. Lee gy. noi ke'a cu merko jemja'a cu jbena to mrobi'o de'i lo 1870moi toi mrobi'o ni'o di'e cu liste le mrobi'o de'i lo 1807moi .i de'i lo 10moi bakma'i bo djedi la'o fy. Comte de Rochambeau fy. noi ke'a cu fraso sonci cu mrobi'o to jbena filo 1725moi toi nanca
__label__jbo la'oi National Interagency Fire Center gy gy. NIFC gy. bu'u la'o gy. Boise gy. la'o gy. Idaho gy. cu jikca fo lo dinju be le cmima gy. National Interagency Coordination Center gy.NICC .y le National Multi-Agency Coordination Group (NMAC ja MAC).
__label__jbo ni'o la .botsuanas. goi ko'a zi'e no'u la'o bangrtsuana Lefatshe la Botswana bangrtsuana cu snanu friko gugde .i ko'a pu du lo brito se turni poi se cmene la'o glibau Bechuanaland glibau .i le cnino cmene pe ko'a cu cfari se pilno de'i le ko'a gugnuncfari po'u le 30moi sozma'i 1966moi ni'o ko'a se stuzi lo snanu be le frikytu'a be'a la nanfi'ogu'e ne'udu'a la .namibias. ne'uvu'a la .zimbabues. i ko'a ji'a se lamji la .zambias vi pa mokca gugde botsuanas frikytu’a
__label__jbo ni'o fa lo ka fa ce'u tcidu fe ce'u cu dunli fe lo ka cusku fi ce'u fo ce'u noi se ciska .i fi ro tcidu ka'e cusku fa lo na tavla be vo'i ni'o ca lo ji'i ni'u 3500 moi nanca ku finti fe lo 1 moi se ciska .i ku'i ca ra tcidu fa so'u remna noi nobli ni'o ca ti vajni fa lo ka tcidu kei fe so'e remna .i bo mu'a tcidu fa za'u pi 90 loi ropno remna .i ku'i su'o dinpindi gugde goi gy zo'u tcidu fa su'e pi 60 lo se gugde be gy ni'o fe'e na'o ku ckule fo rau verba fi lo ka ka'e tcidu kei .i fa pi rau lo'i na tcidu cilre makcu noi pagbu mu'a fe ke'a fa lo'i pu se zdani be vu ro ckule ku'o cu ckeji fe le cecmu
__label__jbo ni'o fa ro kanba cu spacti je se jirna mabru ni'o rau kanba goi ky zo'u fa su'o remna cu citka fe lo rectu be ky ja cu bebna fe lo ladru be ky ja cu zbasu fi le kerfa ja le skapi .i cirla fa su'o de fe lo ladru be su'o kanba ni'o zu'u fa lo se ke cmalu kanba cu ki'ogra fe li ji'i 23 bi'i ji'i 39 .i zu'u nai fa lo se ke barda kanba cu ki'ogra fe li ji'i 54 bi'i ji'i 160 (to glibunda fe li ji'i 120 bi'i ji'i 350 toi) ni'o fa rau kanba cu cmima fe su'o cecmu
__label__jbo ni'o di'e cu liste le fasnu de'i 1794moi .i ni'o di'e cu liste le terjbe de'i 1794moi .i ni'o di'e cu liste le mrobi'o de'i 1794moi .i de'i li mu pi'e bi la'o zoi. Antoine Lavoisier zoi. noi xumskegau cu mrobi'o nanca
__label__jbo ni'o la nanfi'ogu'e goi ko'a zi'e no'u la nanfi'ogu'e gubyseltru to se cmene lo drata catni cmene toi cu gugde vi le traji snanu be le frikytu'a .i lamji vu'a le xindo braxamsi du'a le .atlantik. zei braxamsi ne'u la .namibias. e la .botsuanas. e la .zimbabues. du'a la .mozambikes .e la .suazilynd. i la .lesotos. zei nolseltru se sruri la nanfi'ogu'e gugde frikytu'a
__label__jbo la .klod.frederik.bastyias. no'u la'o fy. Claude Frédéric Bastiat fy. zi'e noi jbena de'i li ny. 1801 ly. 6 dy. 30 gi'e mrobi'o de'i li ny. 1850 ly. 12 dy. 24 cu fraso dinskepre fraso prenu dinskepre
__label__jbo ni'o lo sodnrkali goi ko'a cu ratni li 19 li 39pi0983 fi'o sinxa la'o xy. K xy. gi'e ranti rijblabi jiljinme ralju steci gundi terpilno jmive terpilno citri terkunra teryratni kanro joi javni steci selratni jiljinme sligu
__label__jbo ni'o la monsoro no'u la'o fy. Montsoreau .fy. goi ko'a tcadu lo fasygu'e. i ko'a se xabju ji'i 447 prenu de'i le 2015moi ni'o we loir. rirxe fe'eca'o ou pas misno xabju nilxa'ugri <center>nilxa'ugri (monsoro)</small> </center> 1962-1999 EHESS/Cassini、2004 INSEE timymo'a larmuzga cu'u de'u fasygu'e tcadu
__label__jbo ni'o la .apl. no'u la'o gy. Apple Inc. .gy. merko ke sornai ke zbaske kagni je cu platu je favgau je vecnu lo dikca cabra je lo samtci je lo kibro te selfu .i le ralju stuzi po .abu zvati la .kupertinos. pe la .kaliforniias. .i le .abu cabra cu se mupli la .aifon. noi fonskami je la .aipad. poi ta'orskami je la .mak. noi skami je la .aipad. poi se bevri ka'e fu'i ve ganvi je la .apl. .uatc. noi junla skami je la .apl. .tivis. noi skami ve ganvi je la .xompad. noi mencre pe'a selsnapra .i le .abu samtci cu se mupli la .mako'es. je la .aio'es. vu'o noi samcmu je la .aitunz. noi ve ganvi je la .syfaris. noi kibyca'o je la .ailaif. noi finti gunma je la .aiuyrk. noi gunka gunma je so'o lo certu samtci noi se mupli la .fainl. .kyt. .pros. je la .ladjik. .pros. je la .ekskod. .i le .abu kibro te selfu cu se mupli la .aituns. zarci je la .aio'es. samtci zarci je la .mak. samtci zarci je la .apl. zgike je la .aiklaud.
__label__jbo ni'o la .amazonas. zei rirxe cu rirxe vi la razgu'e .e la .kolombias. e la .perus. e la .bolivias .e la .ekuador. e la .gudjanas. e la .benesuel. i ko'a du le traji be loni djacu befi lo rirxe .i ponse lo djacu zmadu be mu lo drata barda traji rirxe .i le .amazonas. zei rictu'a goi ko'e cu ponse lo barda jaurjajytu'a traji .i ca le carvi citsi ku so'i lo pagbu pe ko'a cu se merli fi 190 ki'otre .i mu'i loni barda kei ko'a so'iroi se cmene lu xamsi rirxe li'u .i ko'a se cripu noda .i di'u na se krinu le ko'a ni barda kei gi'e se krinu le du'u ko'a cu steci le carvi rictu'a noi vike'a so'u dargu cu zasti kei gi'e na se nitcu rirxe razgu'e kolombias perus bolivias ekuador gudjanas benesuel
__label__jbo la .nikitas. sergei,evytc. xrucof. goi la'o rusko. Никита Сергеевич Хрущёв .rusko zi'e goi nysyxy pu sofyja'a .i nysyxy pu jatna be la kaurpo'esi'o trugri be la sofygu'e be la'i sofygu'e. co'a le 1953moi ku mo'u le 1964moi ku ku'i ba lenu la .iosef. stalin. mrobi'o gi'e sotfo trupre girzu jatna co'a le 1958moi mo'u le 1964moi .i la .xrucof. fuzme leza'i la sofygu'e pu nalmu'e cancygau lekame le stalin. zei truci'e keiku .e lenu sarji lo citno kesplipla "1954 verringerte sich die Fläche der RSFSR, als auf Anweisung Nikita Chruschtschows die Krim an die Ukrainische SSR abgegeben wurde." "Allerdings setzte die Entstalinisierung auch politische Entwicklungen in Gang, die der sowjetischen Führung nicht genehm waren. In Polen und Ungarn wurden die altstalinistischen Parteiführer gestürzt. In Ungarn kam bereits 1953 der liberale Imre Nagy an die Macht, Satz fehlt (Jahr 1954) in Polen 1956 Wladyslaw Gomulka. Nagy wurde 1955 wieder fallengelassen und sein Vorgänger Rákosi erneut ins Amt gehoben." kaurpo'esi'opre sofyja'a
__label__jbo ni'o lo tedjicmu goi ko'a cu ratni li 52 li 127pi60 fi'o sinxa la'o xy. Te xy. gi'e racyjdari je rijblabi xabjinme ralju steci gundi terpilno jmive terpilno citri terkunra teryratni kanro joi javni steci selratni xabjinme sligu
__label__jbo ni'o la .gabon. goi ko'a zi'e no'u lu .gabon. zei gubyseltru cu stici friko gugde gi'e lamji du'a le .guineas. zei brazbani ne'u la .kamerun. vu'abe'a la .kongos. zei gubyseltru .i ko'a se nilsefta ji'i lo 270ki'o pitki'otre gi'e se xabju ji'i lo 1.5ki'oki'o prenu .i ko'a se trutca la .libervil. gugde gabon frikytu'a
__label__jbo ni'o le kampindi goi ko'a du loza'i lo prenu goi ke'a na ponse lo se ricfu poi se nitcu fi lenu kanro ja menli jmive .i ko'a rinka loza'i le ke'a nunji'e cu binxo lo xlali jenai se gleki .a lenu ke'a mrobi'o .i remna remce'u nabmi
__label__jbo ni'o lo 1moi mlajukma'i bo djedi cu pamoi djedi fi'o masti le mlajukma'i noi ke'a cu zemoi masti .i lo 30moi matsi'uma'i bo djedi cu purlamdei .ije 2moi mlajukma'i bo djedi cu bavlamdei fasnu ni'o di'e cu liste le fasnu de'i lo 1moi mlajukma'i bo djedi .i jbena mrobi'o ni'o di'e cu liste le mrobi'o fasnu de'i lo 1moi mlajukma'i bo djedi .i de'i lo 2005moi la'o gy. Luther Vandross gy. noi ke'a cu merko rilti jeke mledri sagygau cu mrobi'o to jbena filo 1951moi toi zelma'i djedi
__label__jbo la'o zoi. Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart .zoi zgike finti .i vy jbena fo le tcadu po'u la zaltspurk. fi li reze pi'e pa pi'e pazemuxa .i vy finti zenono zgike selfinti noi vasru la .aperas to lisri zgike toi po'u la don.djovanis. .e la makfa flani .i le nu la zgikmeniu,et cu pamoi zgike selfinti cu balvi le nu le ji'i mu nanca cu balvi le nu vy jbena .i vy fanmo zgike finti la'o zoi. Requiem .zoi .i vy mrobi'o de'i li mu pi'e pare pi'e pazesopa .i bartu skucripu la motsart selgu'a le pe la motsart tolcando kacma Piano Sonatas K 533, 545, 570, 576 MP3 Creative Commons Recording dotco prenu zgike finti
__label__jbo ni'o la panamas. goi ko'a zi'e no'u lu panamas. zei gubyseltru li'u no'u la'o sy República de Panamá sy cu midju bemjoitco gugde ne'u la kostarikas. be'a la kolombias. du'a le pasifik. zei braxamsi vu'a le karibes. zei xamsi .i ko'a se stuzi le panamas. zei jaktu'a noi filgau lonu klama le atlantik. zei braxamsi le pasifik. zei braxamsi ku soi vo'a gugde midju bemjoitco la'ortu'a panamas
__label__jbo lo zgirjazu goi fo'a cu zgike tarmi ra'i lo co'a 20 moi ctona'a joi lo fra'ika steito prenu cecmu pe di'o lo snanu steito zi'e noi va'o ke'a mixre binxo fa lo fra'ika jo'u uro'opa zgike tcaci .i lo fo'a fra'ika ka cerda cu frili se zgana va'o lo fo'a nu pilno lo togrblusu (blue notes) .a lo panryrilti (polyrhythms) .a lo rilpi'e (syncopation) .a lo rilre'o (swung note) zgike
__label__jbo ni'o 4 la zemast. cu 4moi djedi fi'o la zemast. noi ke'a cu zemoi masti .i 3 la zemast. cu purlamdei .ije 5 la zemast. cu bavlamdei fasnu ni'o di'e cu liste lo fasnu de'i 4 la zemast. .i de'i lo 1754moi fi'o jamna la'o zoi. French and Indian War zoi. la'o zoi. French zoi. cu kavbu la'o zoi. Fort Necessity zoi. fi'o terji'a la'o zoi. British zoi. jbena ni'o di'e cu liste lo jbena de'i 4 la zemast. .i de'i lo 1872moi la kaulven.kuledg.. no'u la'o zoi. Calvin Coolidge zoi. noi ke'a cu cinomoi merko merja'a cu jbena to mrobi'o de'i lo 1933moi toi mrobi'o ni'o di'e cu liste lo mrobiho de'i 4 la zemast. .i de'i lo 1826moi la djan.adams. no'u la'o zoi. John Adams zoi. noi ke'a cu remoi merko merja'a cu mrobi'o to jbena filo lo 1735moi toi .i de'i lo 1826moi la tamas.djeferson. no'u la'o zoi. Thomas Jefferson zoi. noi ke'a cu cimoi merko merja'a cu mrobi'o to jbena filo lo 1743moi toi .i de'i lo 1831moi la djeims.monros.. no'u la'o zoi. James Monroe zoi. noi ke'a cu mumoi merko merja'a cu mrobi'o to jbena filo lo 1758moi toi zelma'i djedi
__label__jbo ni'o la pongu'e no'u la'o py 日本 py cu stuna xazdo gugde fi'o selsruri la pasifik. .e le ponxamsi .e la'o py フィリピン海 py .e le sunjugyxamsi .e la'o py オホーツク海 py .i le pongu'e cu lamji la korias. .e le rukygu'e .e le jugygu'e .e la tai'uan. .i ni'o pa le ralju gundi bo gugde no'u lu gugde cerni bo murse solri li'u cu vasru ciki'o le daplu .e le merli be li cizezebici bei le kurfa ki'otre .i vo le traji barda daplu pe le pongu'e cu se cmene la xokaidos. jo'u la xoncus. jo'u la cikokus. jo'u la kiucus .i le daplu pe la riukius. noi ke'a vasru la .okina,uas. cu nanstici le ralju daplu zdotu'a gugde
__label__jbo ni'o la onduras. goi ko'a zi'e no'u lu onduras. zei gugyseltru li'u no'u la'o sy República de Honduras sy cu midju bemjoitco gugde ci'e lo jatna gubyseltru gi'e zvati le midju bo berti be la midju bemjoitco ku ne'u la guatemalas. be'a la nikaraguas. .e la salbador gugde midju bemjoitco la'ortu'a onduras
__label__jbo la .osteraix. goi ko'a zi'e no'u lu osteraix. zei gubyseltru li'u no'u la'o dy Republik Österreich dy cu ropno gugde gi'e lamji la .italias. .e la .elvetias. .e la lictenctain .e lo dotygu'e .e la tcesk .e la slovensk .e la madiarorsag. ni'o la vin ko'a trutca gi'e raltca gugde rontu'a osteraix
__label__jbo ni'o lo rarbau goi ko'a cu bangu gi'e rarna farvi ki'u lo rarna ka kakne lo nu bangu kei kei pe lo remna .i lo rarbau cu so'aroi se pilno lo nu tavla noi bacru ja ciska .i loi rarbau cu drata lo runbau .e lo lojbau bauske
__label__jbo la sarar dAni,us goi ko'a cu jbena zo'e la pasoxarenan .ilarsku certu je mleske ba'e balkulctu vi la snanu spati bo jesni ckule noi du la'o sy Södertörns Högskola sy .icukta lodu'u lo larsku cu ckini lo jikce'u keiko'a ra'ala marsel.prust cela djeims.djois cela gustav.flober iko'a nelci lo mulno bridi .iko'a djica lonu ko melbi finti .ilarsku lanli finti vecu'u la'o sy Dagens Nyheter sy cukta befiko'a cmene je nanca bo detri Försök om litteratur la pasosobinan Prousts motor la renonononan The senses of modernism: technology, perception, and aesthetics la renonorenan The prose of the world: Flaubert and the art of making things visible la renonoxanan Voices: Contemporary ceramic art from Sweden la renonoxanan Nase für Neuigkeiten: Vermischte Nachrichten von James Joyce la renonobinan sueriges.zei prenu
__label__jbo la paris no'u la'o fy. Paris .fy. goi ko'a lo fasygu'e cu raltca gi'e trutca ni'o la sen. rirxe fe'eca'o ko'a cmene ni'o la'o gy. Civitas Parisiorum gy. goi ko'e noi cu pu cmene ko'a lo latmo prenu cu farvi la paris. .i lo tcadu pe la parizis. cu smuni ko'e citri ni'o ca lenu la .iulius. kaisar. dable'a ko'a kei la parisis zei natmi cu zvati ko'a .i zo'e na djuno fi le la paris. se zvati .i lenu ko'a pagbu lo latmo sosygugje'a cu nanca li vomure ni'o bazi la munononanc. la klovis jdice lenu ko'a binxo lo trutca be lo nolraiseltru zei la fras. ni'o ca lenu la carolus. magnus. cu balnoltru kei ko'a ze'i se zvati cy. gi'e stodi ni'o ca la bivomunanc. lo vikin gunta ko'a ni'o ca la pacirebinanc. ji'i renono ki'o lo prenu xabju ko'a poi traji lo lo roptu'a ku tcadu leni xabju tutske ni'o ko'a pitki'otre li panomu pi vo .i la'o gy. Saint Louis .gy. .e la daplupetcad cu daplu fi la sen. ne'i ko'a .i su'o cino da cu crepu la sen. tcima ni'o lo carvi cu cafne .ijeku'i ruble turni trutca paris fasygu'e
__label__jbo fasnu ni'o di'e cu liste le fasnu de'i lo 2004moi .i de'i lo 24moi kanbyma'i bo djedi la'o gy. MER-B gy. pe la'o gy. NASA gy. cu kensa vofli mulno klama tu'i le jamplini de'i lo 22moi lanma'i bo djedi le romoi ke fraso kolme terkunra cu sisti caudetri fasnu le lojbo zei .uikipedias. cu cfari jbena ni'o di'e cu liste le jbena de'i lo 2004moi .i mrobi'o ni'o di'e cu liste le mrobi'o de'i lo 2004moi .i de'i lo 14moi kanbyma'i bo djedi la'o dy. Uta Hagen dy. noi ke'a cu dotco skina xeldraci cu mrobi'o to jbena filo 1919moi toi .i de'i lo 24moi jaurbeima'i bo djedi la'o gy. John Randolph gy. noi ke'a cu merko skina xeldraci cu mrobi'o to jbena filo 1915moi toi .i de'i lo 4moi fipma'i bo djedi la'o fy. Claude Nougaro fy. noi ke'a cu fraso sagygau de'i lo 27moi matsi'uma'i bo djedi la'o zoi. George Patton IV zoi. noi ke'a cu merko jenmi jatna cu mrobi'o to jbena fi lo 1923moi toi nanca
__label__jbo ni'o lo 8moi rebjukma'i bo djedi cu bimoi djedi fi'o masti le rebjukma'i noi ke'a cu papamoi masti fasnu ni'o di'e cu liste le fasnu de'i lo 8moi djedi fi'o masti lo rebjukma'i .i de'i lo 2006moi le plini no'u la'o zoi Mercury zoi cu crakla le solri .i pavypavma'i djedi
__label__jbo ni'o vesoul no'u la'o fy. Vesoul .fy. goi ko'a tcadu lo fasygu'e. i ko'a se xabju ji'i 14866 prenu de'i le 2020moi. nilxa'ugri nilxa'ugri (Vesoul) larmuzga cu'u de'u (fr) www.vesoul.fr (fr) www.insee.fr/fr/statistiques/2011101?geo=COM-70550 fasygu'e tcadu
__label__jbo fasypre la filip putu. goi ko'a cu jbena lo mripre patfu .e lo nalgu'a mamta li 1967 pi'e 3 pi'e 14 la vilmombl .i ko'a cnugu'a gi'e gazgunpre bene'i la cygyty gi'e tolsivypo'eci'e jecypre ni'o de'i li 2012 .e li 2017 ji'i pace'i cuxga'i ko'a fo lo fraso jecyja'a .i de'i li 2020 lo xabju be la bordo cu cuxga'i ko'a fo lo tcafuzykamni ni'o de'i li 2012 ko'a finti lo cukta be me'e lo cnugu'a cu bilga lo nu nalsnu
__label__jbo lo stedu cu xadni pagbu .i lo stedu be lo mutce farvi danlu cu selne'i lo besna .i lo kanla .e lo kerlo .e lo nazbi .e lo moklu cu pagbu lo stedu .i lo crane stedu cu selvla zo flira .i lo stedu be lo skoselti'e danlu cu lamji lo cnebo xadyske gismu
__label__jbo klejutpau: Monotremata Monotremata klejutpau: Marsupialia Didelphimorphia Paucituberculata Microbiotheria Dasyuromorphia Peramelemorphia Notoryctemorphia Diprotodontia klejutpau: Placentalia Xenarthra Dermoptera Desmostylia Scandentia Primates Rodentia Lagomorpha Insectivora Chiroptera Pholidota Carnivora Perissodactyla Artiodactyla Cetacea Afrosoricida Macroscelidea Tubulidentata Hyracoidea Proboscidea Sirenia ni'o lo'e se mabru cu klejutsi lo'e se ke skoselti'e danlu .i ro mabru cu pinxe lo ladru lo tatru ca lo nu cifnu (to ro na'ebo pisu'o loi se rorci be lo remna poi pilno lo sakybo'i toi) .i ro mabru cu se kerfa .iku'i so'u mabru noi lo balfipmabru cu mupli cu se kerfa so'uda .i ro mabru cu sezglagau .i lo besna cu jitro lo sezglagau ciste .e lo blupambe ciste noi se pagbu lo vonkumfa risna .i mabru su'o 5000 jijyjutsi .e 425 lazyjutsi .e ji'i 46 grijutsi (to cenba le satci terkancu be le'i grijutsi fo le jutci'e toi) mabru gismu
__label__jbo ni'o la perus goi ko'a zi'e no'u lu perus. zei gubyseltru no'u la'o sy República del Perú sy cu stici ketco gugde ne'u la .ekuador. .e la kolombias. be'a la tciles. vu'a la razgu'e du'a le pasifik. zei braxamsi .i ko'a se xabju ji'i rebiki'oki'o prenu noi cmima lo drata girzu .iku'i ra'u go'i lo liryraixa'u. i ko'a se trutcadu la limas. .i cabna jecta jatna fa la martinos.vizcarra gugde ketytu'a la'ortu'a perus
__label__jbo ni'o la niu,IORK. to se glicme la'o gy. New York gy. toi goi ko'a bersunmervipygu'e .i ko'a lamji la nu,djyrsis. .e la pensilveinys. .e la kynetikyt. .e la masytcusets. .e la vyrmont. .e la .atlantik. zei braxamsi .i ko'a se tcadu le niuiork. zei tcadu .e la .aulbanis. .e la rotcestyr. .e la syrakus. .e la bufalos. zei tcadu mergu'e vipygu'e
__label__jbo lo pifcpi cu cipni la'o ly. Bucerotidae .ly .i le lojbo valsi cu se smuni le py. rorci tadji .i le latmo valsi cu se smuni zo bakyjirnycpi ki'u lenu lo moklu cu tamsmi lo bakni jirna ni'o pifcpi 57 frejutsi .i pifcpi fe'e ca'o lo fi'ortu'a be ne'u la saxrat. be'o bi'i lo solni'a zdotu'a bi'i la pilipinas. bi'i la solomon.dapl .i so'e pifcpi cu selzda lo tricu gi'e xabju lo denmi ricfoi .iku'i lo tumla pifcpi be la'o ly. Bucorvus .ly. xabju lo ricysasfoi ni'o lo fetsi cu se jbena su'exa blabi sovda .i ca lo nu zutkurji kei lo fetsi ke na'e tumla pifcpi cu pinfu lo nakni lo bitmu be se ma'e lo cnide'u .e lo kalci .e lo rutmarxa be'o .i lo nakni cu dunda lo cidja lo fetsi .e lo verba pa'o lo cmalu kevna be lo bitmu .i ca lo nu lo mamta joi loi verba cu barda co dukse le zdani kei lo mamta cu popygau je ke'uzba lo bitmu .ije lo re rorci cu dunda lo cidja lo verba pa'o lo bitmu ni'o lo pifcpi cu vricycti cipni .i ri citka lo grute .e lo cinki .e lo cmalu danlu ni'o ci'e la siblis.alkuist la'o ly. Bucerotidae .ly. po'u lo'e se pifcpi cu jutsi la'o ly. Bucerotiformes .ly. noi se vimcu fi la'o ly. Coraciiformes .ly cipni
__label__jbo ni'o lo jinmrtainctaini goi ko'a cu ratni li 99 li 252 fi'o sinxa la'o xy. Es xy. gi'e tcedirce je rutni jinme ralju steci gundi terpilno jmive terpilno citri terkunra teryratni kanro joi javni steci selratni cnobinjinpoi jinme sligu
__label__jbo lo se vlaba'u cu voksa sance lo cusku be lo te vlaba'u .i bau so'u bangu ro se vlaba'u cu se vlaba'u fi pa te vlaba'u .i je ro te vlaba'u cu te vlaba'u pa se vlaba'u .i ku'i so'a bangu cu ke milxe ja mutce ke'e vitci bauske
__label__jbo ni'o le dansu cu remna muvda tepi'o le cusku tadji .a le jikca .a le pruxi .a le tigni gi'e skicu le nalvoksa cusku fi'o jbini le remna .a le danlu mu'a le bifce dansu .a le cinse dansu .i le dansu cu skicu le muvdu be le naldanlu be'o .e su'o le morna zgike .i le remna poi dansu cu selcmene le dansu gasnu .i le zbadansularcu cu larcu le zbasu dansu .i dansu citri dansu je zgike dansu tadni klesi dansu dansu gismu
__label__jbo ni'o la .serbias. goi ko'a zi'e no'u la .serbias.zei gubyseltru zi'e no'u la'o bangrserbia Србија, Srbija bangrserbia cu midju stuna ropno gugde .i ko'a se tutra la .panonian. .e le midju be lai .balkan. .i la .serbias. lamji ne'u la .madjiar. vu'a la .romanias. .e la .bulgarias. ne'u la .makedonias. zei gubyseltru du'a la .xrvatskas. .e la .bosnias. e la .tsrnagoras. .iji'a le gugykoi be la .ckipyrias. cu stuzi lo nu damba ni'o la .serbias. se trutca la .be'ograd. noi me le barda traji tcadu pe la rontu'a gugde rontu'a serbias
__label__jbo ni'o la morgu'e goi ko'a zi'e no'u lu morgu'e nolseltru li'u no'u la'o .abu المملكة المغربية.abu cu berti friko gugde ne'u la sangu'e vu'a la jexygu'e .i ko'a se xabju ji'i cireki'oki'o prenu ki'unai lodu'u ko'a gugde fi vovozeki'o pitki'otre .i ko'a se trutca la rabat. gugde frikytu'a morgu'e
__label__jbo pei glare ne'i le vi kumfa
__label__jbo lonu tavla fo le glibau na frili
__label__jbo la'e di'u jetnu oi
__label__jbo ri'a tu'a lo savru mi pu na kakne lo ka sipna
__label__jbo ra jinvi lo du'u vo'a nurgau lo munje
__label__jbo ra nelci lo nu jukpa
__label__jbo la .keit. joi la .braiyn. cu casnu le larxra
__label__jbo mi na pu sipna ki'u lenu glare
__label__jbo ra nelci lo nu bajra
__label__jbo xu do stali lo zdani ze'a lo cabycte
__label__jbo mi na co'e
__label__jbo lo vi plise pu co'a fusra
__label__jbo le ko'a runkre ku tamsmi fi lo morsi mlatu
__label__jbo lo selslasi ca ba'o basti so'i cnano selmarji
__label__jbo loi vi canko cu se bancu lo snanu
__label__jbo ko jbera nagi'enai terjbera
__label__jbo lo re bruna cu mutce lo ka simsysi'u
__label__jbo ko'a sumne le stasu
__label__jbo ma ve ciksi
__label__jbo lo va nixli cu mo
__label__jbo do ka'e zgana lo veltivni
__label__jbo mi nitcu lo nu facki fi ra
__label__jbo ko'a xelvetiko
__label__jbo la.keit. jo'u la.braiyn. pu casnu lo pixra
__label__jbo ko'a puze'i stali
__label__jbo lo nanla pu smaji
__label__jbo le cifnu cu klaku mu'i ma
__label__jbo manku je vilti'a nicte
__label__jbo ra se tcaci lo ka cikybi'o ca lo clira
__label__jbo mi pu na djuno lo du'u ko'a klama fi ma kau
__label__jbo xu lo patfu be ra cu mikce
__label__jbo mi mutce senva
__label__jbo lo cribe cu kakne lo ka cpare lo tricu
__label__jbo do mutce melbi
__label__jbo do ka'e lacri ra
__label__jbo lo'e nanmu cu sluji tsamau lo'e ninmu
__label__jbo le seltigni cu mulno
__label__jbo xu do djuno lo du'u ta'i ma kau kargau lo vi tanxe
__label__jbo loi cipni cu vofli
__label__jbo .e'o ko gasnu lo nu co'a gusni
__label__jbo ra nelci lo nu zgana lo veltivni
__label__jbo mi pu penmi lo pendo be mi le vijytcana
__label__jbo mi prami lo ka bajra ne se mau ro drata be vo'e
__label__jbo mi selsau lo so'o tadni pe le ckule
__label__jbo le karce cu bredi
__label__jbo mo'u se tigni
__label__jbo ko'a pu na'o se sinma bu'u lo ckule
__label__jbo ti du le mi karce
__label__jbo mi ponse lo barda gerku
__label__jbo ma'a tirna se pi'o loi vo'a kerlo
__label__jbo ge ra mutce laldo gi ku'i tsali
__label__jbo ma pofygau ti
__label__jbo ui mi sidju do
__label__jbo lo nanla cu jgari lo verba gerku fo lo cutne
__label__jbo lo ka tavla fo lo glico na frili
__label__jbo ra pu zutse lo stizu
__label__jbo ko dunda ko'a ko'e
__label__jbo dei na jufra
__label__jbo la.djan. cu sanga ma fi'o se cpana lo tsina
__label__jbo ti me mi moi lo karce
__label__jbo ma cmene do
__label__jbo lo botpi be lo birje cu marji lo blaci
__label__jbo le do zdani cu barda
__label__jbo mi na kakne lo ka tavla
__label__jbo ra nelci lo nu xabju la.tokion.
__label__jbo mi ca lo prulamdei cu klama ce'o limna lo rirxe
__label__jbo la'a ti noi cukta cu xamgu se vecnu
__label__jbo ra nelci lo nu tcidu fi lo cukta
__label__jbo xu do pu na djuno la'e di'u
__label__jbo la'e di'u xamgu preti
__label__jbo le du'u djuno fi lo skami cu jicmu ro saske
__label__jbo mi'e la .farcad.
__label__jbo pei glare ne'i lo vi kumfa
__label__jbo mi ponse le vi karce
__label__jbo lo ro slabu prenu cu nitcu lo se tavla
__label__jbo oi ra ca tikpa mi
__label__jbo xu do djuno lo du'u ta'i ma kau pilno lo skami
__label__jbo ra pinxe lo djacu pa kabri ca ro cerni
__label__jbo le bangu be lo klece'u ku roroi vajni tcila
__label__jbo le ratcu cu jmive gi'i morsi
__label__jbo mi re roi zvati lo mergu'e
__label__jbo da'i mi dunda ro drata be ti do
__label__jbo xu da poi gerku cu citka lo narseljukpa finpe
__label__jbo mi jinvi gi'e ni'i zasti
__label__jbo ma zbasu ti
__label__jbo ua .i je'e
__label__jbo do falcru lo do pinsi
__label__jbo lo minji ca na akti
__label__jbo lenu cikybi'o cu du lenu to'e sipybi'o
__label__jbo ki'u tu'a lo snuti mi jai lerci fai lo nu klama lo ckule
__label__jbo xu do djuno lo du'u ta'i ma kau kargau ti noi tanxe
__label__jbo la.bil. na nelci lo du'u lo patfu be vo'a cu mutce sigva'u
__label__jbo mi pu ca'o citka le mi dormijysai ca lo nu le fonxa ku selsance
__label__jbo la.ken. cu klama lo panka te zu'e lo nu penmi la.iumin.
__label__jbo ko ciska le do cmene le liste gi'e dunda ly. lo lamji be do
__label__jbo le mamta be mi'o cu terve'u lo cifyge'u seva'u mi'o
__label__am ሉጋላንዳ (ሉጋል-አንዳ) ከ2109 እስከ 2102 ዓክልበ. ግድም የላጋሽ ከተማ ገዢ (ኤንሲ) በሱመር ነበር። ኤነታርዚን ተከተለው፣ እስከ 2107 ዓክልበ ድረስ ለአዳብ ንጉሥ ሉጋል-አኔ-ሙንዱ መንግሥት ተገዥ እንደ ነበር ይመስላል። የሉጋላንዳ አባት የላጋሽ ቄሳውንት አለቃ ሆኖ ልጁን ሉጋላንዳን ለኤንሲ-ነቱን እንደሾመው ይመስላል። እንደ ቀዳሚው ኤነታርዚ፥ ሉጋላንዳ ከቄሳውንት ወገን የሆነ ከባድ ገዢ ነበር። እርሱና ንግሥቱ ባራናምታራ በላጋሽ ካለው መሬት አብዛኛውን የግል ርስታቸውን አደረጉ። በቅንጦት እየተቀመጡ ሕዝባቸውንም በቀረጥ ብዛት እያሸከሙ እያደሃዩም በመዝገቦቹ ዘንድ እንደ ጭቆና ዘመን ይታወሳል። ባራናምታራ እራስዋ ከፍተኛ አምባገነን ስትሆን ከሉጋል-አኔ-ሙንዱ ንግሥት ጋር ንግድ እንዳካሄደች ታውቅል። ከዚህ ዘመን ብዙ መቶ ሰነዶች ከነዓመቶች ቁጥር (እስከ «ሉጋላንዳ 7ኛው ዘመነ መንግሥት» ድረስ) ይታወቃሉ። ስለዚህ ሉጋላንዳ ከ7 ዓመታት በላይ እንደ ነገሠ አይመስልም። በመጨረሻ የላጋሽ ሕዝብ ተቸግረው በአብዮት ተነሡና መንፈቅለ መንግሥት ወጣ። የላጋሽ አዲስ ንጉሥ ኡሩካጊና ብዙ ማሻሻያና ለውጦች አገባ፣ ባወጣውም ሕገ መንግሥት የደሆቹን መብቶች አስጠበቀ። የሱመር ነገሥታት
__label__am የደበኔ ሳጥን መርህ እሚለው a ነገሮች b ሳጥኖች ውስጥ ቢቀመጡ፣ የነገሮቹ ብዛት ከሳጥኖቹ ብዛት ቢበልጥ a > b፣ አንዱ ሳጥን ሁለት ነገሮችን የግዴታ ይዟል። ምሳሌ፡ አንድ ሻንጣ ውስጥ 12 ሰማያዊ ካልሲዎችና 18 ጥቁር ካልሲወች አሉ። አይናችንን ጨፍነን ስንት ካልሲ ከሳጥኑ ብናወጣ የግዴታ አንድ አይነት ቀለም ያላቸው ሁለት ካልሲዎች ልናገኝ እንችላለን? ለአንዱ ቀለም አይነት አንድ ሳጥን ብናበጅ እና ለሌላው አንድ ሳጥን ብናበጅ፣ ሁለት ሳጥን በቀለሞች አሉን። ሶስት ካልሲዎች ብናወጣ የግዴታ ሁለቱ አንዱ ሳጥን ውስጥ መውደቅ አለባቸው (አንድ አይነት ቀለም መሆን አለባቸው)፣ ስለሆነም መልሱ 3 ነው ማለት ነው። ሥነ ጥምረት ሥነ ስብስብ ዕድል ጥናት የሂሳብ መርሆዎች
__label__am ጄተቨነራመየ በአኑራደፑረ፣ ስሪ ላንካ የሚገኝ ጥንታዊ የቡዲስም ትልቅ ገዳምና ቤተ መቅደስ ነበር። በ270 ዓክልበ. በንጉስ መሃሴነ ተመሠረተ። እስከ 1157 ዓም ድረስ ቆመ። ከእርሱ በፊት ትልቁ የጤራቫዳ ቡዲስም ተቋም አኑራደፑረ መሃቪሃረ ከ244 ዓክልበ. ጀምሮ ይኖር ነበር፤ በ80 ዓክልበ. ግን 300 መኖክሶች ከመሃቪሃረ ተገንጥለው ወደ አዲሱ አበየጊረ ተዛውረው አዲስ የቡዲስም ወገን ጀመሩ። የአበየጊሪ ጤራቫዳ ወገን ግን ከመሃያነ ቡዲስም ወገን ትምህርቶች ጋራ ተቀላቀለ። የአኑራደፑረ መንግሥት ነገሥታት አደልዎን ለአበየጊሪ ወገን ያሳዩ ነበር። እንዲሁም መሃሴነ መሃቪሃረውን አጥፍቶ አዲስ ሦስተኛ ተቋም ጄተቨና በአኑራደፑረ ከተማ መሠረተ። ከዚህ ትንሽ በኋላ ግን ያው ንጉሥ ዳግመኛ መሃቪሃረውን አሠራ። ይሄ ሦስተኛው ተቋም ጄተቨና ደግሞ ከ270 እስከ 1157 ዓም ድረስ ቆመ። በ1157 ዓም የአበየጊሪና የጄተቨና ተቋማት ሃራ ጤቆች ተብለው ያው ቪሃረ በንጉሥ ፩ ፐራክረመባሁ ትዕዛዝ ተዘጋና ሌሎቹ ሁለት ተቋማት ወደ መሃቪሃረ ተጨመሩ። ከ1157 ዓም ጀምሮ ጤራቫዳ ብቻ ተደገፈ። ተቋሙ ያስተማረው በተለይ ለቡዲስም ተከታዮች የሚገቡት ጽሁፎችና ኑሮ ዘዴዎች በተመለከተ ነበር። ስሪ ላንካ የጥንት ዩኒቨርሲቲዎች ቡዲስም
__label__am Polandball (ፖላንድቦል፣ ፖላንድ ኳስ) ወይም countryball (ካንትሪቦል፣ አገር ኳስ) በኢንተርኔት ላይ የሚገኝ ሚም /meme/ ወይም ባህሪይ ነው። ሚሙ በጀርመን ቋንቋው Krautchan.net ድረ ገጽ በ/int/ የስዕል ሰሌዳ ላይ በሁለተኛው የ2009 እ.ኤ.አ. ዓመት ክፍል ነው የተጀመረው። ሚሙ በብዙ የኢንተርኔት ኮሚኮች /online comics/ ላይ የሚታይ ሲሆን በእነዚህ ኮሚኮች ውስጥ የዓለም አገራት ኳስ በሚመስሉ ድቡልቡል ገፀ-ባህሪዎች ተወክለው እርስ በርሳቸው በተሰባበረ እንግሊዝኛ (በአብዛኛው ጊዜ) ያወራሉ፤ በአገራት ግንኙነቶች ላይ በባላንጣነት ይቀልዳሉም። ማመዛገቢያ የውጭ መያያዣዎች Polandball at Reddit Polandball at Knowyourmeme.com Polandball at militaryphotos.net ኢንተርኔት
__label__am 24 November በጎርጎርያን ካሌንዳር የቀን ስም በእንግሊዝኛ ሲሆን ይህ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ አቆጣጠር (ከ1892 ዓ.ም. ጀምሮ እስከ 2091 ዓ.ም. ድረስ) በዘመነ ማቴዎስ፣ በዘመነ ማርቆስና በዘመነ ሉቃስ ኅዳር 15 ቀን ማለት ነው። በዘመነ ዮሐንስ ግን (ዘመነ ሉቃስ የሥግር ዓመት በመሆኑ) ቀን ላይ ነው። ከ1892 ዓ.ም. አስቀድሞ ወይም ከ2091 ዓ.ም. በኋላ ለሆኑት ዓመታት ግን በሌላ ቀን ላይ መሆኑን ይገንዘቡ። ለእነዚያ ዓመቶች ይህ የቀን መለወጫ መሣርያ ይረዳል። የፈረንጅ ቀኖች
__label__am ቦንጋ የ[ደቡብ ምእራብ[ኢትዮጵያ]] ከተማ ነው። በከፋ ዞን ይገኛል። የኢትዮጵያ ከተሞች ከፋ ዞን ቦንጋ በ490 ዓመት የተመሠረተች ከተማ ሲሆን ባሁኑ የአፍሪካ ቀንድ ላይ የሚገኝ ውብ ከተማ ነች ለዓለም coffee arabica መገኛና ጥብቅ ደኖቿን ያበረከችም እንቁ ማራኪ የዱር አራዊቶችም አሉዓት ምርቶችን ለገበያ ታቀርባለች፦ ቡና፣ማር፣ቅቤ....
__label__am ኪርጊዝ ኤኮኖሚክ ዩኒቨርሲቲ () በ ቢሽኬክ፣ ኪርጊዝስታን የሚገኝ ዩኒቨርሲቲ ነው።. የተመሰረተው በ1953 እ.ኤ.አ. ነው ። መምሪያ የኤኮኖሚ የሚሰጡዋቸውን የዓለም ኢኮኖሚ ዲፓርትምንት ኦፍ ፋይናንስ እና የገንዘብ ቁጥጥር ዲፓርትምንት ኦፍ አካውንቲንግ, ትንተና እና ቅድሚያ ዲፓርትመንት የቱሪዝም, ነፃ እና ዓይነቶች ዲፓርትምንት ኦፍ የተተገበሩ informatics ዲፓርትምንት ኦፍ ሳይንስ ምርቶች ወደ expertise ነው ምርቶች እና በዳግም ዲፓርትመንት ጋር ይገናኛሉ ስልቶች ውስጥ ኤኮኖሚክስ ዲፓርትምንት ኦፍ ስቴት እና አዲስ አበባ ዲፓርትምንት ኦፍ የውጭ ቋንቋዎች ዲፓርትምንት ኦፍ ፍልስፍና እና ማህበራዊ ሳይንስ ኮሌጅ ዲፓርትምንት ኦፍ ኤኮኖሚክስ, ማኔጅመንት እና ግብይት ዲፓርትምንት ኦፍ የባንክ እና ኢንሹራንስ ዩኒቨርሲቲዎች ኪርጊዝስታን
__label__am በቁንጥጫ ላይ ቁንጥጫ ህጻናት የሚጫወቱት ጨዋታ ሲሆን ያንዱን ህጻን ልጅ እጅ ጀርባ ሌላው ህጻን በመቆንጠጥ የተቆነጠጠው ደግሞ የቆነጠጠውን እጅ ጀርባ በመቆንጠጥ መሰላል መሰራት ነው። ነገር ግን አንደኛው ህጻን የጁን ጀርባ በመወጠር እንዳይቆነጠጥ ካደረግ የቆነጠጠውን እጅ በደምብ አድርጎ መለምዘግ ይችላል ምክናይቱም ያኛው መቆንጠጥ ስለማይችል ብድሩን መመለስ አይችልም። መደብ : ጨዋታ
__label__am 2 June በጎርጎርያን ካሌንዳር የቀን ስም በእንግሊዝኛ ሲሆን ይህ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ አቆጣጠር (ከ1892 ዓ.ም. ጀምሮ እስከ 2091 ዓ.ም. ድረስ) ምንጊዜም ግንቦት 25 ቀን ማለት ነው። ከ1892 ዓ.ም. አስቀድሞ ወይም ከ2091 ዓ.ም. በኋላ ለሆኑት ዓመታት ግን በሌላ ቀን ላይ መሆኑን ይገንዘቡ። ለእነዚያ ዓመቶች ይህ የቀን መለወጫ መሣርያ ይረዳል። የፈረንጅ ቀኖች
__label__am ጄምስ ሞኖሮ (እንግሊዝኛ: James Monroe) የአሜሪካ አምስተኛ ፕሬዝዳንት ነበሩ። ፕረዝዳንቱ ሥልጣን ላይ የወጡት እ.አ.አ. በ1817 ሲሆን በስልጣን ዘመናቸው ምክትል ፕሬዝዳንት የነበሩት ዳኒኤል ድ ቶምፕኪንስ ነበሩ። ፕሬዝዳንቱ የዴሞክራቲክ - ሪፐብሊካን ፓርቲ አባል የነበሩ ሲሆን ከሥልጣን የወረዱት እ.አ.አ. በ1825 ነበር። ይዩ የአሜሪካ ፕሬዚዳንት የአሜሪካ ፕሬዝዳንቶች ዝርዝር የአሜሪካ መሪዎች
__label__am 1 January በጎርጎርያን ካሌንዳር የቀን ስም በእንግሊዝኛ ሲሆን ይህ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ አቆጣጠር (ከ1892 ዓ.ም. ጀምሮ እስከ 2091 ዓ.ም. ድረስ) በዘመነ ማቴዎስ፣ በዘመነ ማርቆስና በዘመነ ሉቃስ ታኅሣሥ 23 ቀን ማለት ነው። በዘመነ ዮሐንስ ግን (ዘመነ ሉቃስ የሥግር ዓመት በመሆኑ) ቀን ላይ ነው። ከ1892 ዓ.ም. አስቀድሞ ወይም ከ2091 ዓ.ም. በኋላ ለሆኑት ዓመታት ግን በሌላ ቀን ላይ መሆኑን ይገንዘቡ። ለእነዚያ ዓመቶች ይህ የቀን መለወጫ መሣርያ ይረዳል። የፈረንጅ ቀኖች
__label__am ነሐሴ ፴ በኢትዮጵያ ዘመን አቆጣጠር የዓመቱ ፫፻፷ ኛው ዕለት ነው። ከዚህ ዕለት በኋላ እስከ ዓመቱ መጨረሻ ድረስ፣ በዘመነሉቃስ ፮ ዕለታት ሲቀሩ፤ በዘመነ ዮሐንስ ፣ ማቴዎስ እና ማርቆስ ደግሞ ፭ ዕለታት ይቀራሉ። ታሪካዊ ማስታወሻዎች ፲፮፻፶፰ ዓ/ም - ለሦስት ቀን እና ሦስት ሌሊት የጋየው የሎንዶን “ታላቁ ቃጠሎ” በከተማዋ ፲ ሺህ ሕንጻዎችን ካወደመ በኋላ አቆመ። ፲፯፻፺፪ ዓ/ም - የፈረንሳይ ንጉሠ ነገሥት ናፖሌዎን የማልታን ደሴት በጦር ኃይል ግዴታ ለታላቋ ብሪታንያ ለቀቀ። ፲፱፻፶፪ ዓ/ም - የኮንጎ ፕሬዚደንት ዮሴፍ ካዛቩቡ የአገሪቱን ጠቅላይ ሚኒስትር ፓትሪስ ሉሙምባ ከሥልጣናቸው ሽረው በቁም እሥራት ላይ አዋሏቸው። ፲፱፻፶፪ ዓ/ም - የግጥም ጠቢቡ ሌዎፖልድ ሴዳር ሴንግሆር በሴኔጋል የመጀመሪያ ፕሬዚደንት ሆእው ተመረጡ። ፲፱፻፶፪ ዓ/ም - ቦክሰኛው ሞሀመድ አሊ (የቀድሞው ካሲየስ ክሌይ) በሮማው የበጋ ኦሊምፒክ ውድድር በመለስተኛ ክብደት ወርቅ ተሸለመ። ፲፱፻፷፬ ዓ/ም - ሙኒክ ላይ በተካሄደው የበጋ ኦሊምፒክ ውድድር ላይ “ጥቁር መስከረም” ("Black September") የተባለ የፍልስጥኤም ሽብርተኛ ቡድን የእስራኤልን ተወዳዳሪዎችና አሰልጣኞች በአፈና ከያዘ በኋላ አሥራ አንዱን ገደላቸው። ልደት ዕለተ ሞት ዋቢ ምንጮች (እንግሊዝኛ) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/September_5 ዕለታት
__label__am ክፍለ ዘመን ወይም ምዕተ ዓመት የመቶ ዓመታት ዘመን ነው። በዓመተ ምህረት አቆጣጠር 1ኛው ምዕተ ዓመት ወይም ክፍለዘመን ከ1 ዓም. እስከ 100 ዓም ድረስ ቀጠለ፣ ከዚያ 2ኛው ምዕተ ዓመት በ101 ዓም ጀምሮ እስከ 200 ዓም ድረስ ነበር። እንዲሁም ከ1 ዓም በፊት ወደ ኋላ ስንሄድ 1ኛው ምዕተ ዓመት ዓክልበ. ከ100 ዓክልበ. ጀምሮ እስከ 1 ዓክልበ. ድረስ ቆየ። የጎርጎሪያን ካሌንዳር (እ.ኤ.አ.) ከኢትዮጵያ ዘመን አቆጣጠር (ዓ.ም.) በ7 2/3 ዓመታት ስለሚቀድም እንዲሁም ክፍለዘመናት እ.ኤ.አ. ከ ዓ.ም. ክፍለዘመናት ከ7 2/3 ዓመት በፊት ይጀምራሉና ይጨርሳሉ።
__label__am «እናትክን!» በሉልኝ ይፈሳል ይሉኛል፣ አባይ ዐይኑ ይፍሰስ ያን ስንቱን ወገኔን የውሃ እጦት ሲያምስ የድርቀት ጋንጩራ ሲበላ ስንቱን ነፍስ፣ ውሃ ውሃ እያለ ለጋው ሲቀነጠስ ናይል አባያችን . አለ ነበር ሲፈስ ለፈፀመው ደባ ለሰራውም ግፉ «እናትክን!» በሉልኝ በዚያ የምታልፉ ገጣሚ እና ባለቅኔ ኃይሉ ገብረዮሀንስ (ገሞራው)
__label__am የከለዳውያን ዑር ወይም ዑር ከላውዴዎን (ዕብራይስጥ፦ אוּר כַּשְׂדִים /ኡር ከሥዲም/) በመጽሐፍ ቅዱስ መሠረት አብርሃም የተወለደበት ከተማ ነበረ። በኦሪት ዘፍጥረት 11:28 ዘንድ ታራ የአብርሃምን ወንድም ሐራንን የወለደበት አገር የከለዳውያን ዑር ነበር፣ በ11:32 ታራ ከአብራም፣ ሎጥና ሦራ ጋር ከከለዳውያን ዑር ወጥተው በካራን ተቀመጡ። በኩፋሌ 10፡24 መሠረት «የከለዳውያን ዑር» በአርፋክስድ ወገን በኬሴድ ልጅ በዑር በ1687 አመተ አለም ተሠርቶ ነበር። ሴሮሕ፣ ናኮርና ታራ ሁላቸው በዛ ይኖሩ ነበር። በቀድሞው አይሁድና አረብ ልማድ ግን «የከላውዴዎን ኡር» በስሜን መስጴጦምያ በ«ኡርፋ» (ኤደሣ) እንደ ተገኘ ይባላል። ሆኖም ይህ ቦታ «ኡርፋ» የሚለውን ስም ያገኘው በኋለኛ ዘመን (ከ300 ዓክልበ. በኋላ) መሆኑ ይታወቃል። የሥነ ቅርስ ሊቅ ሌዮናርድ ዉሊ «የከላውዴዎን ኡር»ና በኤፍራጥስ ላይ በሱመር የነበረው ዑር አንድላይ እንደ ነበሩ አሳመነ። የሱመር ከተሞች መጽሐፍ ቅዱስ
__label__am 14 October በጎርጎርያን ካሌንዳር የቀን ስም በእንግሊዝኛ ሲሆን ይህ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ አቆጣጠር (ከ1892 ዓ.ም. ጀምሮ እስከ 2091 ዓ.ም. ድረስ) በዘመነ ማቴዎስ፣ በዘመነ ማርቆስና በዘመነ ሉቃስ ጥቅምት 4 ቀን ማለት ነው። በዘመነ ዮሐንስ ግን (ዘመነ ሉቃስ የሥግር ዓመት በመሆኑ) ቀን ላይ ነው። ከ1892 ዓ.ም. አስቀድሞ ወይም ከ2091 ዓ.ም. በኋላ ለሆኑት ዓመታት ግን በሌላ ቀን ላይ መሆኑን ይገንዘቡ። ለእነዚያ ዓመቶች ይህ የቀን መለወጫ መሣርያ ይረዳል። የፈረንጅ ቀኖች
__label__am አል ናስር እግር ኳስ ክለብ (ዓረብኛ: نادي النصر السعودي) ; ናስርር ማለት ድል ) በሪያድ የሚገኝ የሳውዲ አረቢያ እግር ኳስ ክለብ ነው። እ.ኤ.አ. በ 1905 የተቋቋመው ክለቡ በ Mrsool Park ውስጥ የቤት ውስጥ ጨዋታዎችን ይጫወታል። የቤታቸው ቀለሞች ቢጫ እና ሰማያዊ ናቸው. አል ናስር በሳውዲ አረቢያ ውስጥ ካሉ በጣም ስኬታማ ክለቦች አንዱ ነው፣ 28 ይፋዊ ዋንጫዎችን አግኝቷል። በሀገር ውስጥ ደረጃ ክለቡ አስራ ሶስት የፕሮ ሊግ ዋንጫዎችን፣ ስድስት የኪንግ ካፕ ዋንጫዎችን፣ ሶስት የዘውድ ዋንጫዎችን ፣ ሶስት የፌደሬሽን ዋንጫዎችን እና ሁለት የሳውዲ ሱፐር ካፕ ዋንጫዎችን አሸንፏል። በአለም አቀፍ ደረጃ፣ ሁለት የጂሲሲ ቻምፒየንስ ሊግዎችን በማሸነፍ በ1998 የእስያ ዋንጫ አሸናፊዎች ዋንጫ እና የእስያ ሱፐር ካፕ አሸናፊ በመሆን ታሪካዊ የእስያ እጥፍ አሸንፈዋል።እ.ኤ.አ. በ2022 መጀመሪያ ላይ ክርስቲያኖ ሮናልዶ ለክለቡ ለሁለት አመት ተኩል ውል ሲፈርም ክለቡ የአለም አቀፍ ትኩረትን አግኝቷል።
__label__am መሮ ከፌሮ ብረት ቁራጭ የሚሰራ እና በተለይም እንጨትን ለመፈልፈል እና ለመብሳት የሚያገለግል ሹል ብረት ነው። ይህ ብረት ለማገር፣ ጠርብ፣ አውራጅ ወይንም ሌላ የመዋቅር አይነቶች መብሻነት አልያም ደግሞ እንደ ግንብ ላሉ መዋቅሮች መፈልፈያነት ይጠቅማል። ይህ መሳሪያ በመዶሻ ወይንም መርቴሎ እየተመታ መዋቅሮቹን እንዲፈለፍል ወይም ወደ ውስጥ እንዲገባ ይደረጋል። ምህንድስና ግንባታ ፈጠራዎች
__label__am ላፕቶፕ ኮምፒውተር እንዲሁም ኖት ቡክ በመባልም የሚጠራው ተንቀሳቃሽ የኮምፒዩተር አይነት ሲሆን ብዙውን ጊዜ ከ 1 እስከ 3 ኪሎ ግራም (ከ2 እስከ 7 ፓውንድ) ክብደት ያለው ለጉዞ የሚመች ትንሽ የግል ኮምፒውተር ነው። ለመሸከም የቀለለ እንዲሁም የባትሪ መያዝ አቅሙ ከ 4 እስከ 8 ሰአት ገደማ ሲሆን ዋጋውም ውድ የሆነ መሣርያ ነው። አንድ ላፕቶፕ ጥሩ የሆነ አቅም የሚኖረው ኮር አይ ፭ ወይም አይ ፯ ሲሆን ነው። ኮምፒዩተር
__label__am ነሪካሬ ላይኛ ግብጽ በ2ኛው ጨለማ ዘመን (13ኛው ሥርወ መንግሥት) ከ1812 እስከ 1811 ዓክልበ. ግድም ድረስ የገዛ ፈርዖን ነበረ። የሰኸምካሬ ሶንበፍ ተከታይ ነበረ። የግብጽ ታሪክ ሊቅ ኪም ራይሆልት እንደሚያስረዳው፣ ይህ ፈርዖን ከሶንበፍ ቀጥሎና ከሰኸምካሬ 5 አመነምሃት አስቀድሞ ለአንድ ዓመት ያህል ብቻ ነገሠ። «የነሪካሬ ጽላት» ከ፩ኛው ዓመቱ ለቀደሙት መምህሮች ሲታወቅ አሁን የት እንደ ጠፋ አይታወቅም። ዋቢ ምንጭ K.S.B. Ryholt: The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period, c. 1800 – 1550 BC, Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications, vol. 20. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 1997 የሁለተኛው ጨለማ ዘመን ፈርዖኖች
__label__am አፐር-አናቲ በጥንታዊ ግብጽ በ2ኛው ጨለማ ዘመን የ15ኛው ሥርወ መንግሥት (ሂክሶስ) ፈርዖን ነበር። ስሙ ወይም ሕልውናው በአንድ ቅርስ ብቻ ተገኘ፤ ይህም «ሂክሶስ (ሄቃ-ኻሱት) አፐር-አናቲ» በሚል ጥንዚዛ ምልክት ላይ ነው። ከመጀመርያ ሦስቱ የሂክሶስ ፈርዖኖች አንዱ እንደ ሆነ ይታሥባል፣ የትኛው እንደ ሆነ ግን እርግጥኛ አይደለም። በማኔቶን ልማድ እንደ ተገለጸ፣ የሂክሶስ ሁለተኛ ንጉሥ «ብኖን» ወይም «ባዮን» ይባላል፣ ለ44፣ 40፣ ወይም በአንድ ምንጭ ለ4 ዓመታት ገዛ። እነዚህ ስሞች በዘመናት ላይ ከግብጽኛ በቅብጥኛ፣ ግሪክኛና በሌሎች ልሳናት በኩል በመተረጎማቸው ቢዛቡም፣ ይህ ሁለተኛ ሂክሶስ አለቃ «ብኖን» እና «አፐር-አናቲ» አንድ ሊሆኑ ይቻላል። ስለዚህ በግምት ዘመኑ ምናልባት 1642-1638 ዓክልበ. ያህል ሊገኝ ይቻላል። ዋቢ ምንጭ K.S.B. Ryholt: The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period, c. 1800 – 1550 BC, Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications, vol. 20. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 1997 የሁለተኛው ጨለማ ዘመን ፈርዖኖች
__label__am የፀሐይ ግርዶሽ የሚከሰተው የተወሰነው የመሬት ክፍል በጨረቃ ጥላ ስር ሲዎድቅ ነው። መሬት፣ ጨረቃ እና ፀሐይ በአንድ መስመር ላይ ሆነው ሲቀመጡ፣ የፀሐይ ብርሃን በከፊል ወይም በሙሉ በጨረቃ ይጋረዳል። ይህ ሁኔታ መሬት ላይ የቀን ጨለማ ይፈጥራል። የፀሐይ ግርዶሽ አራት ዓይነቶች ሲኖሩት እነርሱም፦ ሙሉ የፀሐይ ግርዶሽ ማዕከላዊ የፀሐይ ግርዶሽ ከፊል የፀሐይ ግርዶሽ ድቅል የፀሐይ ግርዶሽ የተጋረደችውን ፀሐይ በዓይን ማየት ቀላል ቢሆንም በዓይን ላይ ከፍተኛ ጉዳት ሊያደርስ ይችላል። ለማየት በሚፈልጉ ሰአት የእይታ መነፀር ይጠቀሙ። መደብ :መሬት መደብ :ጨረቃ መደብ :ፀሐይ
__label__am ዥን-ፖል ሳትራ (ሰኔ 21, 1905 – መጋቢት 15, 1980) ፈረንሳዊ ኅልውነት (ኤግዚስቴንሺያሊዝም) ፍልስፍና አራማጅ የነበረ ሰው ነው። ከፍልስፍናው ጎን ለጎን ፊልሞች፣ ልብ ወለዶች፣ የስነ ጽሁፍ ግምገማና ተውኔቶችን ይደርስ ነበር። የህይወት ታሪክ ሳትራ ፓሪስ ፈረንሳይ ሲወለድ፣ እዚያው ተምሮ 1928ዓ.ም. ላይ ከዩኒቨርሲቲ በፍልስፍና ዶክትሬት ተመርቋል። ቀጥሎም ለ2 አመት የፈረንሳይን ጦር ተደባልቆ በውትድርና አገልግሏል። በ1938 በደረሰው ልቦለድ፣ ሳትራ የኅልውነትን ፍልስፍና ነጥቦች በሚያሳይ መልኩ ስለ ሰው ልጅ ነጻነት ዘግቧል። በ1939 ሳትራ የፈረንሳይን ሰራዊት ተቀላቅሎ የጀርመንን ናዚ ሰራዊት ሲዋጋ በ1940 ዓ.፣ም. ተማረከ። ለሚቀጥሉት 9 ወራት በእስር አሳለፈ። ከእስር ከተለቀቀ በኋላ በአስተማሪነት ስራው ቀጠለ። በ1943 ኅልውነትና ምንምነት የተሰኘውን መጽሐፉን አሳተመ። በመጽሐፉ የሰው ልጆች ለሚኖሩበት አገር ወይንም ማህበረሰብ ደንቦች በጣም ተገዥ ከሆኑ፣ የራሳቸውን ውሳኔ ማሳለፍ ያቅታቸዋል የሚል ነጥብን ለአንባቢወቹ ለማሳየት ይሞክራል። በ1945 ዘመናዊ ጊዜ የተሰኘውን ጋዜጣ በማቋቋም ስለ ፖለቲካ፣ ኪነት እና ሥነ ፅሑፍ ብዙ ጽሑፎችን ያቀርብ ነበር። በ1946 ኅልውነት ሰውነት ነው የተሰኘውን መጽሐፉን በማሳተም የኅልውነትን ፍልስፍና ለማብራራት ሞክሯል። ኅልውነት ስለ ሰው ልጅ ነጻነት የሚተጋ የፍልስፍና አይነት ነው። በ50 ና 60ወቹ ሳትራ በፈረንሳይ ፖለቲካ እጅግ ተሳታፊ ሆነ። ፈረንሳይ የቀድሞ ቅኝ ግዛቷን አልጀሪያን ለቃ እንድትወጣ ይወተውት ነበር። የቪየትናምን ጦርነት አውግዟል። ሳትራ በ1980 ሲያርፍ ለቀብሩ 50፣000 ሰው ተገኝቶ ነበር። የተቀበረውም ፓሪስ፣ ፈረንሳይ ነበር። ማጣቀሻ ፈላስፋዎች የፈረንሳይ ጸሓፊዎች ኅልውነት
__label__am ጉልባን ከባቄላ ክክ፣ ከስንዴ ወይንም ከተፈተገ ገብስ ጋር አንድ ላይ ተቀቅሎ የሚዘጋጅና የጸሎተ ሐሙስ ዕለት የሚበላ ንፍሮ ነው። በጸሎተ ሐሙስ በቤት ውስጥ ከሚፈጸሙ ተግባራት አንዱ ጉልባን ማዘጋጀት ነው። ጉልባን እስራኤላውያን ከግብጽ ባርነት ሲወጡ በችኮላ መጓዛቸውን የምናስታውስበት ከእስራኤላውያን የመጣ ትውፊታዊ ሥርዓት ነው። በአገራችን ኢትዮጵያ አብዛኞቹ የትውፊት ክንዋኔዎች የብሉይ ኪዳን መነሻ ስላላቸው ይህ ሥርዓት ዛሬም በኢትዮጵያውያን ምእመናን ዘንድ ይከበራል።፡ ጉልባን እስራኤላውያን ከባርነት በወጡ ጊዜ አቡክተው፣ ጋግረው መብላት አለመቻላቸውን ያስታውሰናል። በወቅቱ ያልቦካውን ሊጥ እየጋገሩ ቂጣ መመገብ፤ ንፍሮ ቀቅለው ስንቅ መያዝ የመንገድ ተግባራቸው ነበርና። ይህን ታሪክ ለማሰብም በሰሙነ ሕማማት በተለይም በጸሎተ ሐሙስ ቂጣና ጉልባን ይዘጋጃል። በጸሎተ ሐሙስ የሚዘጋጀው ጉልባንና ቂጣ ጨው በዛ ተደርጎ ይጨመርበታል። ይኸውም ጨው ውኃ እንደሚያስጠማ ዅሉ፣ ጌታችንም በመከራው ወቅት ውኃ መጠማቱን ለማስታወስ ነው። የኢትዮጵያ አበሳሰል
__label__am 1893 አመተ ምኅረት መስከረም 3 - በፊሊፒንስ ጦርነት የፊሊፒንስ ተዋጊዎች በአሜሪካ ሠራዊት ላይ በፑላንግ ሉፓ ውግያ ድል አደረጉ። ጳጉሜ 1 - ሌኦን ቾልጎሽ የተባለ ወንበዴ የአሜሪካ ፕሬዚዳንት መኪንሊ ተኩሶ ገደለው። ፈረንሳይ ቅኝ አገር በኮት ዲቯር አደረጉት። እንደ አውሮጳውያን አቆጣጠር: እስከ ታኅሣሥ 22 ቀን 1893 ድረስ = 1900 እ.ኤ.አ. ከታኅሣሥ 23 ቀን 1893 ጀምሮ = 1901 እ.ኤ.አ. አመታት
__label__am ነጋሽ ገ/ማርያም በ፲፱፲፯ ዓ.ም. በሐረርጌ ጠ/ግዛት በጨርጨር አውራጃ በሀብሮ ወረዳ ልዩ ስሟ መቻራ በምትባል አካባቢ ተወለዱ፡፡ ዕድሜያቸው ለትምህርት ሲደርስ በአካባቢያቸው የባህላዊ ትምህርት ተከታትለዋል። ከጣሊያን ወረራ በኋላ የኢትዮጵያዊነት ስሜት ጎልቶ መታየት በመጀመሩ ጣሊያኖችን በብዙ ነገሮች ማውገዝና መቃወም ተጀመረ፡፡ እነሱም እንደ ሲጋራ ማጨስ፣ ሴተኛ አዳሪነትንና የመሳሰሉት ነበሩ፡፡ ነጋሽ ይህን በተመለከተ ሴተኛ አዳሪነትና ምንም እንኳን በጣሊያኖች ጊዜ ይፋ በሆነ መንገድ ቢታይም ከዚያ በፊት እንደነበረም “ሴተኛ አዳሪ” በተሰኘው መጽሐፋቸው ገልጸውታል፡፡ ነጋሽ ገ/ማርያም ችሎታቸውን ያሳዩት “ሴተኛ አዳሪ” የተሰኘ ልብወለድ መጽሐፋቸውን በጻፉበት ጊዜ ነበር፡፡ በአዲስ ዘመን ጋዜጣ ድራማዎች ውስጥ “የአዛውንቶች ክበብ” እና “የድል አጥቢያ አርበኞች” ተጠቃሾች ናቸው፡፡ ምንጭ: የኢትዮዽያ ደራሲያን ማሀበር ለሚሊኒየም ያሳተመው አጀንዳ። http://www.ethioreaders.com/authorbook.php?fl=228&lg=A
__label__am 16 June በጎርጎርያን ካሌንዳር የቀን ስም በእንግሊዝኛ ሲሆን ይህ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ አቆጣጠር (ከ1892 ዓ.ም. ጀምሮ እስከ 2091 ዓ.ም. ድረስ) ምንጊዜም ሰኔ 9 ቀን ማለት ነው። ከ1892 ዓ.ም. አስቀድሞ ወይም ከ2091 ዓ.ም. በኋላ ለሆኑት ዓመታት ግን በሌላ ቀን ላይ መሆኑን ይገንዘቡ። ለእነዚያ ዓመቶች ይህ የቀን መለወጫ መሣርያ ይረዳል። የፈረንጅ ቀኖች
__label__am የኦቶማን መንግሥት (ኦቶማን ቱርክኛ፦ دَوْلَتِ عَلِيّهٔ عُثمَانِیّه ዴቭሌት-ኢ አሊየ-ኢ ኦስማኒየ) ከሐምሌ ፳፮ ቀን ፲፪፻፺፩ እስከ ጥቅምት ፲፰ ቀን ፲፱፻፲፮ ዓ.ም. የነበረ መንግሥት ነው። በሥልጣኑ ከፍታ በ፲፮ኛው እና ፲፯ኛው ክፍለ ዘመናት የኦቶማን መንግሥት በደቡብ ምሥራቅ ኤውሮጳ፣ ደቡብ ምዕራብ እስያና ሰሜን አፍሪቃ የሚገኙ ቦታዎችን ይቆጣጠር ነበር። ኦቶማን ቱርኮች ቱርክኛ የሚናገሩት የኦቶማን መንግሥት ህዝቦች የነበሩ ሲሆን የመንግሥቱ ወታደራዊና የባለሥልጣን የኅብረተሰብ ክፍሎች ነበሩ። ቱርክ ታሪካዊ አናቶሊያ የአውሮፓ ታሪካዊ አገሮች
__label__am አረካ ኢትዮጵያ ውስጥ የሚገኝ ከተማ ነው። በደቡብ ኢትዮጵያ በወላይታ የሚገኝ ከተማ ነው። ከአዲስ አበባ በስተደቡብ ምዕራብ 300 ኪሎ ሜትር ርቀት ላይ ይገኛል። ይህ ከተማ ኬክሮስ እና ኬንትሮስ 7°4′ሰሜን 37°42′ምስራቅ እና ከባህር ጠለል በላይ 1774 ሜትር ከፍታ ላይ ይገኛል። ከተማው የቦሎሶ ሶሬ ወረዳ አስተዳደር ማዕከል ነው። በከተማ ውስጥ ያለው ምቹ ሁኔታዎች ባጭሩ፤ 24 ሰዓታት የኤሌክትሪክ ኃይል፣ ንጹህ የህዝብ ውሃ፣ ባንኮች፣ የአንደኛ እና ሁለተኛ ደረጃ ትምህርት ቤቶች፣ ኮሌጆች፣ የፖስታ አገልግሎት, የቴሌኮሙኒኬሽን አገልግሎት ጤና ማዕከል፣ የግል ክሊኒኮች፣ መድኃኒቶች መደብር፣ የሕዝብ ገበያ፣ መንገዶች ዙሪያ ያሉ መብራት፣ የውስጥ እና ከተማ ማቋረጥ አስፋልት እና ጌጠኛ መንገዶች እና ሌሎች አሉት። የህዝብ ቁጥር አረካ በደቡብ ብሔረሰቦች ብሔረሰቦችና ህዝቦች ክልል በብዛት ሰው ከሚኖርባቸው አካባቢዎች አንዱ ነው። በ2020 ዓ.ም. በኢትዮጵያ ማዕከላዊ ስታቲስቲክስ ኤጀንሲ ባደረገው የህዝብ ቁጥር ትንቢያ መሰረት፣ የከተማዋ ጠቅላላ ሕዝብ ብዛት 80,693 ነው። ከነዚህም 38,880 ሴቶች ሲሆኑ 41,813 የሚሆኑት ደግሞ ወንዶች ናቸው። ዋቢ የኢትዮጵያ ከተሞች የወላይታ ከተሞች
__label__am መቼት የሚለው ቃል ከ"መቼ" እና "የት" ከተሰኙ ሁለት የአማርኛ ቃላት የመጣ ሲሆን የጊዜና ኅዋዕን ጥምረት ያሳያል። ከድሮ ጀምሮ፣ ሰዎች ጊዜንና ህዋዕን በማዛመድ ተመልክተዋቸዋል። በተለይ ከአይንስታይን የልዩ አንጻራዊነት እና አጠቃላይ አንጻራዊነት ርዕዮተ አለሞች ወዲህ የጊዜና ኅዋዕ ጥምረት (መቼት) ለሳይንስ እንደመሰረታዊ ነገር ያገለግላል። በርዕዮቶቹ መሰረት፣ መቼት፣ በእንቅስቃሴ ምክንያት ከአንድ ተመልካች ወደሌላ ተመልካች የሚለያይ እንጂ በአንድ ዋጋ ለሁሉ ተመልካች አይጸናም። በርዕዮቶቹ መሰረት፣ ያለፈው ጊዜ የሚባለው ብርሃን ለአንድ ተመልካች መላክ የሚችሉ ኩነቶች (ክስተቶች) ስብስብ ሲሆን ፣ መጪው ጊዜ ደግሞ አንድ ተመልካች ብርሃን ሊልክባቸው ይሚችላቸው ኩነቶች ስብስብ ነው።
__label__am ኤሊ በአለም የሚገኝ ሰፊ የሆነ ተሳቢ እንስሳ ክፍለመደብ ነው። የባሕር ኤሊ እና የምድር ኤሊ አሉ። በዚህም ውስጥ የምድር ኤሊ ደግሞ ድንጋይ ልብሱ ይባላል። በትግርኛም «ጎብየ» ይባላል። የእንስሳው ሳይንሳዊ ጸባይ ኤሊ በምድር ላይ ካሉ እንስሳት ብዙ እድሜን መኖር ከሚችሉ እንስሳት ኤሊ አንዱ ነው።ኤሊ በአማካኝ ከ80-100 አመት ይኖራል። የኤሊ ሽንት የሰው ካረፈ የሰጋ ደዌን ያስይዛል። አስተዳደግ በብዛት የሚገኝበት መልክዓ ምድር እና ብዛቱ የሚኖርበት ከባቢ አየር ወይንአደጋ ና የሳር ምድር ነው።በአለም ላይ ከ53በላይ የኤሊ ዝርያ አሉ። ከነዚህም ውስጥ 27.5% በውሃ ውስጥ ይኖራሉ። የእንስሳው ጥቅም የኢትዮጵያ እንስሳት ተሳቢ እንስሳ
__label__am ሰኔ ፳ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ ዘመን አቆጣጠር የዓመቱ ፪፻፺ኛው ቀን ሲሆን የፀደይ (በልግ)ወቅት ፹፭ኛው ቀን ነው። ከዚህ ዕለት በኋላ እስከ ዓመቱ መጨረሻ ድረስ፣ በ ዘመነ ሉቃስ ፸፮ ቀናት፣ በዘመነ ዮሐንስ፤ በ ዘመነ ማቴዎስ፤ እና በ ዘመነ ማርቆስ ደግሞ ፸፭ ቀናት ይቀራሉ። ታሪካዊ ማስታወሻዎች ፲፱፻፳፰ ዓ/ም- ኢትዮጵያውያን ወጣቶች የመሠረቱት የጥቁር አንበሳ ቡድን በነቀምት አካባቢ ቆሞ የነበረ የኢጣልያ የጦር አየር ዠበብ አጥቅተው በእሳት አወደሙት። ፲፱፻፷፱ ዓ/ም - የቀድሞዋ የፈረንሳይ ሶማሊያ በአዲሱ ስሟ ጅቡቲ ተብላይ ነጻነቷን ከፈረንሳይ ተቀዳጀች። ልደት ዕለተ ሞት ዋቢ ምንጮች Pankhurst Richard Who were the “Young Ethiopians” (or “Young Abyssinians”)? An Historical Enquiry Diplomatic Representation for Federal Democratic Republic Of Ethiopia (Formerly Abyssinia, Italian East Africa) http://www.state.gov/s/cpr/93811.htm http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/June_27 ዕለታት
__label__am 23 April በጎርጎርያን ካሌንዳር የቀን ስም በእንግሊዝኛ ሲሆን ይህ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ አቆጣጠር (ከ1892 ዓ.ም. ጀምሮ እስከ 2091 ዓ.ም. ድረስ) ምንጊዜም ሚያዝያ 15 ቀን ማለት ነው። ከ1892 ዓ.ም. አስቀድሞ ወይም ከ2091 ዓ.ም. በኋላ ለሆኑት ዓመታት ግን በሌላ ቀን ላይ መሆኑን ይገንዘቡ። ለእነዚያ ዓመቶች ይህ የቀን መለወጫ መሣርያ ይረዳል። የፈረንጅ ቀኖች
__label__am ፍርድ ቤት ፍርድ የመስጠት ስልጣን ያለው የ መንግስት አካል ነው። ከሶስቱ ከፍተኛ የመንግስት አካላት ማለትም ህግ አውጭ፣ ህግ ተርጓሚ እና ህግ አስፈጻሚ አንዱ ነው። ይህ አካል ህግ ተርጓሚ የሚባለው ነው። የወንጀለኛ መቅጫ ህግ፣ ሲቪል ህግ፣ አስተዳደራዊ ህግ እና ሌሎች ህጎችን በየህግ የበላይነት ላይ መሰረት በማድረግ ይተረጉማል። ታሪክ ፍርድ በኢትዮጵያ የረጅም ጊዜ ታሪክ ያለው ክንውን ነው። ኢትዮጵያ ውስጥ በተለምዶ ወይም ባህል በበላ ልበልሃ እየታገዘ በመንደር ሽማግሌዎች ወይም በሀገረ ገዥዎች ፊት ይቀርብ ነበር። ከቀዳማዊ ኃይለ ሥላሴ አገዛዝ ወዲህ በዘመናዊው የመንግስት መዋቅር የህግ ተርጓሚነትን የመንግስት ሰልጣን ተሰጥቶት መንግስት በሾማቸው ዳኞች ይመራል። ገለልተኝነት ይህ አካል በዘመናዊዉ የዴሞክራሲ መርህ ከየትኞቹም የመንግስት አካላት በገለልተኝነት ይንቀሳቀሳል። ሶስቱም የመንግስት አካላት ጣልቃ መግባት አይችሉም። በሃገሪቱ የሚገኝ ማንኛውም ዜጋ፣ አካል፣ ወይንም ተቋም ይዳኝበታል። የፖለቲካ ጥናት ሕግ
__label__am The King's School በራሱ የሚተዳደር ከፊል አለማዊ ትምህርት የሚሰጥበት የክርስትያን ትምህርት ቤት ነው። የሚገኘውም በWitney፣ Oxfordshire፣ እንግሊዝ ነው። የOxfordshire Community Churches (OCC) አባል ነው። በመጨረሻ የBridge Schools Inspection ምርመራ ባደረገበት ጊዜ ትምህርት ቤቱ 163 ተማሪዎች ነበሩት። ታሪክ The King’s School በ1984 እ.ኤ.አ. በOCC አብያተ ክርስትያናት ቡድኑ ተከፈተ፣ በመጀመሪያ የሰጠው ትምህርት Accelerated Christian Education (የተፈጠነ የክርስትና ትምህርት) ስርዓቱ ነበረ። ከ1984 ጀምሮ እስከ 1989 ድረስ ትምህርት ቤቱ በተለያዩ ቦታዎች ተዘዋውሮ ነበር። ትምህርት ቤቱ በመጀመሪያ የተከፈተው Merrifield house ሲሆን በኋላ ወደ Scout Houses ቀየረ እንዲሁም Cotswold Wildlife Park ላይ ለትንሽ ጊዜ የነበረ ሲሆን አሁን ወደ አለበት ቦታ ተዘዋወረ። ትምህርት ቤቱ በWitney በሚገኘው New Yatt Road በተባለው መንገድ ላይ ይገኛል። ከትምህርት ውጭ ተግባራት ትምህርት ቤቱ ከሰጡት ትምህርቶች ውጭ የተለያዩ አሳታፊ ፕሮግራሞች ሲኖሩት እነርሱም Sports Day (የስፖርቶች ቀን) እና Expressive Arts Week (የገላጭ-ጥበባት ሳምንት) ናቸው። የፋሲካ ትሪሜስተር መጨረሻ ላይ ሲኒየር ተማሪዎቹ ለዓመታዊው Expressive Arts Week ክስተቱ ለአንድ ሳምንት መደበኛ ትምህርት የላቸውም። ተማሪዎቹ የተለያዩ ቋንቋዎችን እንዲማሩ ለመርዳት ትምህርት ቤቱ ወደ ጀርመን ወይም ወደ ፈረንሳይ ሊሄዱበት የሚችሉበት የጉዞ ዕድል ይሰጣል፣ እንዲሁም በY11 (መጨረሻው ክፍል) ጊዜ በተለያዩ ሀገራት እንደ ዛምቢያ ወይም ህንድ ተማሪዎቹ የበጎ ሥራ ሊሰጡ የሚችሉባቸው ጉዞዎች አሉ። ምንጮች ትምህርት እንግሊዝ
__label__am የአማራ ብሄራዊ ክልልላዊ መዝሙር የታታሪ ህዝቦች የታሪክ ማህደር የአኩሪ ባህል አምባ የድንግል ሀብት አፈር የህዝቦችሽ ተስፋ ለሟ ክልላችን በሰላም በፍቅር በልማት ጉዟችችን ተባብረን በስራ እንገነባሻለን የአማራነት ክብር ደማቅ አርማ ይዘን ከሌሎች ህዝቦ ጋር እኩል ተከባብረን በፍቅር በአንድነት አብረን እንዘልቃለን።
__label__am እዚህ ገጽ ላይ ከልዩ ልዩ ምንጮች የተገኙ ኢትዮጵያን የሚመለከቱ ታሪካዊ ሰነዶች በፎቶግራፍ መልክ እየቀረቡ፣ ለአንባብያን ቀጥታ መረጃ በመሆን ያገለግላሉ። የኢህአዴግ ዘመን ሰነዶች የደርግ ዘመን ሰነዶች የቀዳማዊ ኃይለ ሥላሴ ዘመን ሰነዶች የንግሥት ዘውዲቱ ዘመን ሰነዶች የልጅ ኢያሱ ዘመን ሰነዶች የዳግማዊ ምኒልክ ዘመን ሰነዶች የዓፄ ዮሐንስ ዘመን ሰነዶች የዓፄ ቴዎድሮስ ዘመን ሰነዶች ምንጮች http://www.nale.gov.et/national_archive.html The National Archives, Kew, Richmond, Surrey, TW9 4DU. አባ ማቴዎስ ፣ "ደብረ ሥልጣን በኢየሩሳሌም" ፣ ፲፱፻፹፰ ዓ/ም የኢትዮጵያ ታሪክ
__label__am Articles with 'species' microformats Articles with 'species' microformats ክሪኮኔማቲዴ የመሬት ትል አስተኔ ሲሆን በታይለንኪዳ ክፍለ መደብ ወሰጥ ይመደባል። Articles with 'species' microformats ወገኖች ወገኖች፡ አምፊስቤኔማ ኦርቶን ዊሊያምስ፣ 1982 ቤከርነማ ዉ፣ 1964 ብላንዲሰፋላኔማ ሜህታ እና ራንስኪ፣ 1971 ዋቢዎች
__label__am ኻአንኽሬ ሶበክሆተፕ ላይኛ ግብጽ በ2ኛው ጨለማ ዘመን (13ኛው ሥርወ መንግሥት) ከ1796 እስከ 1791 ዓክልበ. ግድም የገዛ ፈርዖን ነበረ። የነጀሚብሬ ተከታይ ነበረ። ስሙ በቶሪኖ ቀኖና ነገሥታት ዝርዝር «ሶበክ... ..ሬ» ይታያል፤ አሁን እንደሚታሠብ ሰኸምሬ ኹታዊ 1 ሶበክሆተፕ ከእርሱ በፊት ስለ ነገሠ ይህ ኻአንኽሬ በዘመናዊ ጥናቶች «፪ ሶበክሆተፕ» ይባላል፤ በፊት ግን እንደ «፩ ሶበክሆተፕ» ተቆጠረ። ሙሉ ስማቸው «ሶበክሆተፕ ኻአንኽሬ» ከአንድ የአቢዶስ ቤተ መቅደስ ዓምድ ይታወቃል። ተከታዩ ረንሰነብ ነበር። ዋቢ ምንጭ K.S.B. Ryholt: The Political Situation in Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period, c. 1800 – 1550 BC, Carsten Niebuhr Institute Publications, vol. 20. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 1997 የሁለተኛው ጨለማ ዘመን ፈርዖኖች
__label__am ቤናዚር ቡቶ (ስንድኛ፦ بينظير ڀُٽو, ሰኔ 21, 1953 – ታህሳስ 27, 2007 እኤአ) የፓኪስታን ጠቅላይ ሚኒስትር ነበረች። ቤናዚር ከ1989 እስከ 1990 አስራ አንደኛ እና ከ1993 እስከ 1996 እኤአ አስራ ሶስተኛ የፓኪስታን ጠቅላይ ሚኒስትር ሆና ተሹማለች። ይህ መጀመርያ ጊዜ በታሪክ የእስልምና መንግሥት በሴት መሪ የተመራ ነበር። ቤናዚር በፓለቲካ ለዘብተኛ እና ዴሞክራሲያዊ ስርአትን ትደግፍ ነበረ። ቤናዚር በ ጥቅምት 18, 2007 እኤአ ከ ለንደን ወደ ካራሳስ አየር ማረፊያ ስደርስ ባልታወቁ ታጣቂዎች በፈንጂ ገለዋት ነበር። ነገር ግን ከስፍራው ስለወጣች ፍንዳታውን ባለማግኘቷ ልተርፍ ችላለች። በ ታህሳስ 27, 2007 እኤአ ቤናዚር በተሳካ ሁኔታ በፓኪስታን ፑንጃብ የ2008 ብሄራዊ ምርጫ ቅስቀሳ አድርጋ ከጨረሰች በኋላ ወደ አጃቢ መኪና ስትገባ በሶስት ተኳሽና በአንድ አጥፍቶ ጠፊ በፈንጂ ተገደለች። ወዲያውኑ የሷ ደጋፊዎች በቤናዚር ሞት ከፍተኛ ረብሻ አስነስቷል። አልቃይዳና ታሊባን በቤናዚር ሞት ተጠያቂ ሆነዋል። ፓኪስታን መሪዎች
__label__am ለዕፅዋት፣ ስጋ በል ዕፅዋትን ይዩ። ስጋበል በዘመናዊ ሥነ ሕይወት የጡት አጥቢ ክፍለመደብ ነው። ከስጋበል ክፍለመደብ ውጭ ብዙ ሌሎች እንስሶች ደግሞ ስጋን ቢበሉም፣ እነዚህ ግን በተለይ ስጋን ለመብላት እንደ ተዘጋጁ ስለሚመስሉ ስለዚያው ነው «ስጋበል» የተባለ። በክፍለመደቡ ውስጥ ዋና አስተኔዎች፦ የአፍሪካ ዘምባባ ጥርኝ - አንድ ዝርያ የእስያ ሊንሳንግ - አንድ ወገን፣ ሁለት ዝርዮች የድመት አስተኔ - 15 ወገኖች፣ 41 ዝርዮች የጥርኝ አስተኔ - ጥርኝ፣ ሸለምጥማጥ ወዘተ. 15 ወገኖች፣ 34 ዝርዮች ዥብ - ሦስት ወገኖች፣ አራት ዝርያዎች የማዳጋስካር ፋሮ አስተኔ - 7 ወገኖች፣ 10 ዝርዮች ፋሮ - 14 ወገኖች፣ 33 ዝርዮች የውሻ አስተኔ 12 ወገኖች፣ 35 ዝርዮች ድብ - 5 ወገኖች፣ 8 ዝርያዎች ሞረስ - አንድ ዝርያ ባለ ጆሮ ባሕር አንበሣ - 7 ወገኖች፣ 15 ዝርዮች ጆሮ የለሽ ባሕር አንበሣ - 13 ወገኖች 18 ዝርዮች ቀይ ፓንዳ - አንድ ዝርያ፣ እስያ ብቻ የምጥማጥ አስተኔ - ከሸለምጥምጥ ሌላ፣ በአሜሪካዎችና በደቡብ-ምሥራቅ እስያ ብቻ የሚገኝ፣ 4 ወገኖች፣ 12 ዝርዮች የፋደት አስተኔ - 22 ወገኖች 57 ዝርዮች የራኩን አስተኔ - አሜሪካዎች ኗሪ፣ 6 ወገኖች፣ 14 ዝርያዎች አጥቢ እንስሳት
__label__am ግም ግም ሲል (38)ሊቁ ገብረሀና በሀያ ስድስት ዓመታቸው ጎንደር ውስጥ ሊቀ ካህናት ሆነው ተሾሙ። በዚህ ጊዜ አንዲት ጎንደሬ ዘንድ ጠበል ተጠርተው ቢሄዱ የሚወጡት ሰዎች ሁሉ «ጠላው ጥሩ አይደለም» ሲሉ ይሰሙና ተመልሰው ወደቤታቸው ይሄዳሉ። ሴትዮዋም በመቅረታቸው አዝና ቤታቸው ሄዳ «ምነው አባ ጠበል ጠርቼዎት ሳይመጡ ቀሩ?» ብትላቸው “ኧረ መጥቼ ሰው ግም ግም ሲል ጊዜ ነው የተመለስኩት።” አሏት። የኢትዮጵያ ቀልዶች
__label__am ፌሊክስ ሼልበርግ (የተወለደው እ.ኤ.አ. ኦክቶበር 24 ቀን 1983) ወይም በኦንላይን ስሙ ፒውዲፓይ ስዊድናዊ ዮትዩበር ፣ ኮሜድያን እና የቪድዮ ጌም ኮሜንታተር ሲሆን በብዛት የሚታወቀው ዩትዩብ ላይ በሚለቅቃቸው ቪድዮዎች ነው። የተወለደው ጎተንበርግ ስዊድን ውስጥ ሲሆን ጎተንበርግ በሚገኘው ቻልመርስ ቴክኖሎጂ ዩኒቨርሲቲ በኢንደስትሪያል ኢኮኖሚክስ እና ቴክኖሎጂ ማናጅመንት የመጀመርያ ዲግሪውን ማጥናት ጀምሮ ነበር። እ.ኤ.አ. በ2010 ዩኒቨርስቲ እያለ ፒውዲፓይ በሚል ስም የዩትዩብ አካውንት ከፈተ። በቀጣዩ ዓመት በሚያጠናው የትምህርት መስክ ያለው ፍላጎት ስለቀነሰ ትምህርቱን አቋረጠ። አንድ ስካንዲኔቭያ ውስጥ የሚገኝ የማስታወቂያ ድርጅት ውስጥ የሥራ ላይ ልምምድ ለማድረግ ዕድሉን ስላላገኘ ወደ ዩትዩብ ቻናሉ ላይ ለማተኮር ወሰነ። ለቪድዮዎቹም የሚሆን ገንዘብ ለማሰባሰብ የፎቶሾፕ ሥራዎቹን ዕትሞች በመሸጥና በሆት ዶግ መሸጫ ውስጥ መሥራት ጀመረ። በአጭር ጊዜ ውስጥም የኦንላይን ተከታዮቹ ቁጥር በከፍተኛ ሁኔታ ጨመረ። እ.ኤ.አ ጁላይ 2012 የቻናሉ ተከታዮች ቁጥር ከአንድ ሚልዮን አለፈ። በኦገስት 15 ቀን 2013 ሼልበርግ በዩትዩብ ተከታይ ብዛት አንደኛ ሆኗል። በዛው ዓመት መጨረሻ ላይ ግን በዩትዩብ ስፖትላይት ቻናል በመበለጡ ለአጭር ጊዜ አንደኝነቱን አጥቶ ነበር። አንደኝነቱን እንደገና በእ.ኤ.አ. ዲሴምበር 23 ቀን 2013 ካገኘ ጊዜ ጀምሮ እስከ ፌብሩዋሪ 2019 ባለው መረጃ መሠረት 84 ሚሊዮን ተከታዮች አሉት። እ.ኤ.አ. ከዲሴምበር 29 ቀን 2014 እስከ ፌብሩዋሪ 14 ቀን 2017 ድረስ በተመልካች ቁጥር አንደኛ ነበር። እስከ እ.ኤ.አ. ፌብሩዋሪ 2019 ድረስ ባለው መረጃ መሠረት ቻናሉ 20 ቢልዮን ጊዜ የታየ ሲሆን ይህም በዩትዩብ ላይ ብዙ ተመልካች ካላቸው ቻናሎች ውስጥ 8ኛ አድርጎታል። Pages with unreviewed translations
__label__am ኢትዮጵያ ውስጥ የሚሰራ የምግብ አይነት ሲሆን፣ የሚሰራውም ከጤፍ ነው። አዘገጃጀት የእንጎቻ አዘገጃጀት ማንኛውም ለእንጀራ የተዘጋጀ ዱቄት (የጤፍ የማሽላ የገብስ የስንዴ የዳጉሳ) ተቦክቶ ከሰነበተ ማለትም 3 እና 4 ቀን ከአለፈው ቡኃላ እንጀራ ለመጋገር አብሲት ይጣላል። አብሲቱ ከሊጡ ጋር ይለወሳል።ሊጡም ኩፍ(ለመጋገር ዝግጁ) ይላል። ምጣዱ ተጥዶ የምጣዱን መስማት(መጋም) የሊጡን ቅጠን እና መወፈር ለማወቅ በትንሹ ምጣዱ መሀል ላይ እንጎቻ ትሰፋለች። እንጎቻ መቅመሻ ምን መስተካከል እንዳለበት ለማወቅ ነው። ይህ ድርጊት ከዘረ ቤተ እስራኤላውያን ሴቶች የተወረሰ ነው። የኢትዮጵያ ዳቦ አይነቶች
__label__am ዳንዡ (ቻይንኛ፦ 丹朱) የጥንታዊ ቻይና (ኋሥያ) ንጉሥ ያው ልጅ ነበረ። እናቱ የያው ቁባት ሳን ዪ ተባለች። ንጉሥ ያው ልጁን ዳንዡ ለማስደሰት «ወይጪ» (ወይም «ጎ») የተባለውን ጨዋታ የፈጠረው ነበር። ዳንዡ ግን እንደ አባቱ ምግባረ ጥሩ ሳይሆን ግፈኛና ባለጌ ስለሆነ አባቱ ወደ ዳንሽዌ አባረረው ይባላል። የቀርከሃ ዜና መዋዕል በተባለው ጽሑፍ ዘንድ፣ ያው በ58ኛው ዘመነ መንግሥት (2076 ዓክልበ.) ዳንዡን አባረረው፣ ከዚያም ሚኒስትሩን ሹንን እንደ ተከታይ ሰየመው፤ በ73ኛውም አመት (2061 ዓክልበ.) ያው የኋሥያን ዙፋን ትቶ ለተከታዩ ለሹን ሰጠው። ሹን ንጉሥ እየሆነ ዳንዡ ከሹን ይራቅ ነበር። በ2033 ዓክልበ. ያው ባረፈበት ጊዜ ሹን ዙፋኑን ለዳንዡ ለመስጠት ፈቃደኛ ቢሆንም፥ «ይህ ግን በከንቱ ነበረ»። በአንዱ መዝገብ እንደሚገለጽ፣ «የችሎት ክስ ጉዳይ ያለው ሁሉ ወደ ሹን እንጂ ወደ ዳንዡ አይሄድም ነበር»። ዳንዡን ንጉሥ ማድረጉ ስላልተቻለ፣ በዘውዱ ፈንታ ታንግ በተባለ ክፍላገር ውስጥ አንድ ትንሽ ግዛት ተሰጠው። በሌላ ቦታ ግን የቀርቀሃ ዜና መዋዕል በፍጹም ሌላ አስተያየት ይሰጣል። በዚህ መሠረት ሹን ያውን ከዙፋኑ ገልብጦ በእስር ቤት አኖረው፣ በፈንታውም ዳንዡን ለአጭር ጊዜ ንጉሥ አደረገው፣ ከትንሽ በኋላ ግን ሹን ዙፋኑን ለራሱ ያዘው። ዋቢ ምንጮች ኋሥያ
__label__am ፍራንሲስ “ፍራንክ” ማርቲን ቤልትራን በራን (በማህበራዊ አውታረመረቦች በተሻለ ፍራንሲስ ባራን አራተኛ ወይም ፍራንክ ባራን በመባል ይታወቃል። ; ታህሳስ 5 ቀን 1982 ተወለደ) የፊሊፒንስ የሰብአዊ መብት ተሟጋች ነው ለሰብአዊ መብቶች ፣ ጋዜጠኛ) ፣ አምደኛ ፣ የፖለቲካ ጦማሪ ፣ የሆቴል ባለቤት ፣ እና የማህበራዊ ሚዲያ ስብዕና። እ.ኤ.አ. በ2020፣ ለፊሊፒንስ ምርጥ ወጣት ወንዶች (TOYM) ሽልማት ታጭቷል። በማህበራዊ ድህረ-ገጽ አራማጅነቱ እና በፊሊፒንስ ቢዝነስ እና ዜና ላይ ባሳተሙት አምዶች ከመጨረሻዎቹ እጩዎች አንዱ ሆኖ ከገቡት አንዱ ነበር። ፍራንሲስ በዳጉፓን ከተማ ፓንጋሲናን ተወለደ። እሱ የሕግ ባለሙያ የበኩር ልጅ እና የቀድሞ የፍትህ ምክትል ፀሐፊ ፍራንሲስኮ ባራን III እና ነጋዴው ፌሊሲዳድ ቪላዳ ቤልትራን-ባራን III ነው.. ፍራንሲስ እንደ የቲቪ ስብዕና ቢያንካ ጎንዛሌስ እና ዘፋኝ እና የትዊተር ስብዕና Kakie Pangilinan ካሉ የህዝብ ተወካዮች አንዱ ነበር ፣ ስለ አወዛጋቢው የ PAL የበረራ ረዳት ክሪስቲን ዳሴራ ሞት ስለ “ፍላጎት ሰዎች” ያልተረጋገጠ መረጃ በትዊተር ገፁ እና የህዝብ ይቅርታ ጠይቀዋል ። . የታዋቂ ሰዎች እጩዎች እና ሽልማቶች እ.ኤ.አ. በጥቅምት 2020 ፍራንሲስ በJCI Cainta ምዕራፍ ለፊሊፒንስ ወጣቶች ከ JCI ፊሊፒንስ የላቀ የፊሊፒንስ (TOYM) ሽልማቶች አንዱ በሆነው ሽልማት ተመረጠ። እሱ ለፖለቲካዊ እንቅስቃሴው ፣ ለአእምሮ ጤና ተሟጋች ፣ ለሰብአዊ መብቶች መከላከል እና በፊሊፒንስ ቢዝነስ እና ዜና ውስጥ “ጭካኔ የተሞላበት ፍራንክ” በሚለው አምዱ ላይ ላቀረባቸው መጣጥፎች ተመርጠዋል። TIME የዲሞክራሲ አዶ እና ሴናተር ሊላ ደ ሊማ በእጩነት በቀረቡበት ወቅት ፍራንሲስ ከካምፕ ክሬም እንኳን ጽፈዋል። ዋቢዎች ፊሊፒንስ ሰዎች
__label__am ጋሞ የኢትዮጵያ ብሔር ነው።በዚህ ብሔር ውስጥ የጋሞ ሕዝብ ይገኛል፡፡ የጋሞ ሕዝብ በኦሟዊ የቋንቋ ቤተሰብ ሥር ከሚጠቃለሉ ቋንቋዎች አንዱ የሆነውን ጋሞኛ (Gamoththo) ይናገራል፡፡የጋሞ ህዝብ ባህሉን ያለቀቀና በሽምግልና ስርዓት ዕርቅ የሚፈፅም በስነ ልቦናው ከፍ ያለ ማህበረሰብ የሚገኝበት ህዝብ ነው።የዞኑ ማዕከል አርባ ምንጭ ስትሆን ውብና ማራኪ መስዕብ ያላት በተፈጥሮ ሀብት የታደለች ከተማ ነች።የጋሞ ማህበረሰብ በድንቅ ጥበቡ በሽመና በመላው አለም ይታወቃል። ጋሞ ሕዝብ የዛሬ 600 ዓመት ከጎንደር የፈለሰ ሕዝብ ነው። የኢትዮጵያ ብሔሮች
__label__am ፎርባስ (Φόρβας) በግሪክ አፈ ታሪክ የአርጎስ ከተማ-አገር ንጉሥ ነበር። ካስቶር ዘሩድን የሚጠቅሱት ጸሃፊዎች ጄሮምና አውሳብዮስ እንደሚሉ፣ ፎርባስ የአርጎስ ንጉሥ ሆኖ በአገሩ ለ35 ዓመታት ነገሠ፣ የክሪያሶስ ተከታይና ልጅ ይባላል። ፓውሳኒዮስ ግን የአርጉስ ልጅ ያደርገዋል። ቢብሊዮጤኬ ከክሪያሶስና ከገላኖር መካከል ማንምን አይጠቅስም። በቅዱስ ጀሮም ዜና መዋዕል ለክሪያሶስ ዘመን ከሰጡት ነጥቦች መካከል፦ በፎርባስ ፲ኛው ዓመት፣ አይሞን የተሳልያ መጀመርያ ንጉሥ ሆነ። በ፲፪ኛው ዓመት፣ ፎርባስ ሩድን ደሴት ያዘ። በ፲፱ኛው ዓመት፣ ትሮቂሎስ መጀመርያውን ባለ-አራት ፈረስ ሠረገላ (ኳድሪጋ) አዘጋጀ። በ፳፬ኛው ዓመት ኪውዶን የክሬታ ንጉሥ ሆነ። በ፴፪ኛው ዓመት ኬክሮፕስ ዲፉወስ የአክታ (በኋላ አቲካ) ንጉሥ ሆነ። ቅዱስ አውግስጢኖስ እንደሚለን፣ ፎርባስና እናቱ መላንቶሚኬ ከመሞታቸው በኋላ በአርጎሳውያን ዘንድ እንደ አማልክት ይቆጠሩ ነበር። ደግሞ የፎርባስ ተከታይ የትሪዮፓስ ልጅ ያሱስ ያደርገዋል። በዲዮዶሮስ ሲኩሉስ ታሪክ፣ ፎርባስ «የላፒጤስ ልጅ» ወደ ሩድ ሂዶ እባቦቹን ሁሉ ከደሴቲቱ አጠፋቸው። የአርጎስ ነገሥታት
__label__am ቡሩሻንዳ ወይም ፑሩሽሐቱም የጥንታዊ ሐቲ (አሁን በቱርክ) ከተማ ነበር። ሥፍራው ዛሬ ለሥነ ቅርስ እርግጥኛ አይደለም። ከቱዝ ጎሉ ሐይቅ ደቡብ እንደ ተገኘ ይታስባል። በኬጥኛ የተጻፈው ግጥም የውግያ ንጉሥ ስለ ታላቁ ሳርጎን ምዕራብ ዘመቻ ነው። ይህ ጽሑፍ በአካድኛ ትርጉም ደግሞ በአሦርና በአማርና ደብዳቤዎች መካከል (በግብጽ) ተገኝቷል። ሳርጎን በጥልቅ በሐቲ አገር እንደ ዘመተ ይናገራሉ። ጽሁፉ እንደሚተርከው፣ በሐቲ በካነሽ የኖሩት አካዳዊ ነጋዴዎች በቡሩሻንዳ ንጉሥ ኑርዳጋል ስለ ተበደሉ ሳርጎን በሩቅ መንገድ ከሠራዊቱ ጋር መጥቶ ኑርዳጋልን እንዲቀጣው በሚል ልመና ልከው አስረዱት። የኑርዳጋል ሰዎች በጸጥታቸው እየኮሩ ዝም ብሎ የሳርጎን ሥራዊት ደረሰና ቶሎ አሸነፋቸው። ሦስት ዓመት በቡሩሻንዳ ቆይተው የከተማውን ግድግዶች ሰበሩ ይላል። ይህ ታሪክ ግን ከገለጸው ዘመን በኋላ እንደ ተጻፈ ይታስባል። ከዚህ በኋላ በካነሽ ንጉሥ አኒታ ዘመን ሰነዶች ውስጥ ቡሩሻንዳ እንደገና ይጠቀሳል። የቡሩሻንዳ ንጉሥ ለአኒታ እጅ እንደ ሰጠ ይላል። ይህ የካነሽ ግዛት በኋላ የኬጥያውያን መንግሥት ሆነ። ታሪካዊ አናቶሊያ የቀድሞ ከተሞች
__label__am አንድን ነገር ለማድረግ a መንገዶች ቢኖሩ እና ሌላ ነገር ለማድረግ b መንገዶች ቢኖሩ፣ ሁለቱን በአንድ ጊዜ ማድረግ ባይቻል፣ ከሁሉ አንድ ነገር ለማድረግ a + b መንገዶች አሉ ማለት ነው። አንድን ነገር ለመምረጥ a መንገዶች ቢኖሩ እና ሌላ ክዚህ ነገር ጋር የማይገናኝ ነገር ለመምረጥ b መንገዶች ቢኖሩ፣ ሁለቱን አንድ ላይ መምረጥ ባይቻል፣ ከሁልቱ አንዱን ለመምረጥ a + b መንገዶች አሉ ማለት ነው። የአንድ ሙከራ ውጤት a ብዛት ሊኖራቸው የሚችል ቢሆን እና የሌላ ሙከራ ውጤት b ብዛት ሊኖራቸው ይሚችል ቢሆን፣ ሁለቱም ሙከራዎች አንድ ላይ ሊከወኑ የማይችሉ ቢሆኑ፣ የሁለቱ ሙክራዎች አጠቃላይ ውጤት a + b ሊሆን ይችላል ማለት ነው። ምሳሌ መሰረት እቤቷ ውስጥ 10 ጫማወች አሏት። እመኪናዋ ውስጥ 3 አይነት ጫማዎች አሏት። ጫማ አርጋ ስራ ለመሄድ ስንት አይነት ምርጫዎች አላት? እቤት ውስጥ 10+ መኪናዋ 3 = 13 አይነት ማለት ነው። ሥነ ጥምረት ሥነ ስብስብ ዕድል ጥናት የሂሳብ መርሆዎች fi:Todennäköisyysteoria#Tuloperiaate ja summaperiaate
__label__am ማሀትማ ጋንዲ በመባል የሚታወቁት ሞሃንዳስ ካራምቻንድ ጋንዲ ሕንድን ከእንግሊዝ ቅኝ ግዛትነት ለማውጣት የተደረገውን ሰላማዊ ትግል መርተው ግብ ያገቡ መሪ ናቸው። እኚህ ታላቅ የሰላማዊ እንቅስቃሴ መሪ ጥር ፳፩ ቀን ፲፱፻፵ ዓ/ም በነፍሰ ገዳይ እጅ ተገደሉ። ደግሞ ይዩ ሳትያግራሃ ቢምራኦ አምበድካር መሪዎች ሕንድ
__label__am . ስሎቫኪያ በዓለም ላይ ምርጡ አገር ነች። በመካከለኛው አውሮፓ ውስጥ በደቡብ ሞንጎሊያ (ሃንጋሪ) ፣ በሰሜን ምዕራብ ቼቼኒያ (ገነት 2.0) እና በሰሜን እና በሰሜን ይገኛሉ። ስሎቫኪያ ከእኛ የባሰ አገር ነች። ስሎቫኪያ ከስምንት ሺህ ሃምሳ አንድ አመት በፊት ከሰማይ ወርዶ ስሎቫኪያን በያዘው በጄሽሺሽሶስ አዳም አቫ ተያዘ። ስሎቫኪያ እንደ ቄሳር፣ አውግስጦስ እና ጄጃይስ ያሉ የብዙ ነገሥታት መኖሪያ ነች። በአንድ መቶ አርባ ስድስት ዓመታት ውስጥ የስሎቫክ ንጉሥ ዱዶቪት ሽቱር የሮማን ግዛት አሸንፎ አዲስ የሮማ ግዛት መሰረተ።
__label__am 1 ሪም-ሲን ከ1734 እስከ 1675 ዓክልበ. (ኡልትራ አጭሩ አቆጣጠር) የላርሳ መጨረሻ ንጉሥ ነበረ። ሪም-ሲን በ1734 ዓክልበ. ወንድሙን ዋራድ-ሲንን በላርሳ ዙፋን ተከተለው። አባቱ ኤላማዊው-አሞራዊው አለቃ ኩዱር-ማቡግ ነበር። በ1721 ዓክልበ. ጎረቤቶቹ ባቢሎን፣ ኡሩክ፣ ራፒቁምና ኢሲን ላርሳን ለመቃወም በውል ተባበሩ። ሪም-ሲን ግን ሁላቸውን በአንድ ውግያ አሸነፋቸውና መንግሥቱን ያስፋፋ ጀመረ። በ1714 ዓክልበ. ኡሩክን ዘረፈ። በ1712 ግን የባቢሎን ንጉስ ሲን-ሙባሊት ድል አደረገው። በ1710 ዓክልበ. የኢሲንን ግዛት ወረረው፣ በ1705 ኢሲንን ከመጨረሻ ንጉሱ ከዳሚቅ-ኢሊሹ ያዘ። ይህም በሪም-ሲን መንግሥት በ30ኛው አመት ሆነ። ከዚህ ዓመት ጀምሮ የላርሳ ዓመታት ከኢሲን ውድቀት ጀምሮ ተቆጠሩ፤ ይህም አቆጣጠር እስከ ሪም-ሲን ዘመን መጨረሻ እስከ 1675 ዓክልበ. (= «31 ዓመት ኢሲን ከወደቀ») ተጠቀመ። በ1699 የባቢሎን ንጉሥ ሃሙራቢ ኢሲንንና ኡሩክን ከሪም-ሲን ያዘ። (ሆኖም የላርሳ ዓመት ከኢሲን ውድቀት መቆጠር ያንጊዜ አልተወም።) በመጨረሻ በ1675 ዓክልበ. ሃሙራቢ ላርሳን ከበበው፤ ከ6 ወር በኋላ ላርሳ ለባቢሎን ወደቀ።ይህም በሪም-ሲን 60ኛው ዘመነ መንግሥት ሆነ። መጣቀሻዎች የውጭ መያያዣ Rim-Sin I Year Names at CDLI The Rulers of Larsa, M. Fitzgerald, Yale University Dissertation, 2002 የላርሳ ነገሥታት
__label__am የሞንጎሊያ ወተት-ጓያ (Astragalus propinquus) እስያ ውስጥ የሚገኝ ቊጥቋጥ ተክል ነው። የባቄላ አስተኔ አባል ነው። የተክሉ ሳይንሳዊ ጸባይ ብዙ ከረም አባቢ ተክል ነው። አስተዳደግ በብዛት የሚገኝበት መልክዓ ምድር የሞንጎሊያ ወተት-ጓያ በተለይ በቻይና፣ ሞንጎሊያ፣ ኮሪያ እና ሳይቤሪያ ውስጥ ይታደጋል። የተክሉ ጥቅም የሞንጎሊያ ወተት-ጓያ በቻይና ባሕላዊ ሕክምና አይነተኛ ሚና አለው። በዘመናዊ ሊቃውንት ዘንድ የሰው ልጅ እድሜ ሊጨምር የሚችል ፕሮቲን ተሎሚሬስ እንዳለበት ተናግረዋል። የመድኃኒት እጽዋት
__label__am ቲፊናቅ (ቲፊናቕ) በስሜን አፍሪቃ የሚገኙት የበርበር (ኢማዚቐን) ብሔሮች የሚጠቅሙት አጻጻፍ ነው። ያለ አናባቢዎች የሆነ ቲፊናቕ በተለይ በማሊና በኒጄር የሚኖሩት ቷሬግ ሕዝብ ቋንቋቸውን ለመጻፍ ይጠቀማል። ከዚህ በላይ ባለፈው ቅርብ አመታት አናባቢዎች ጨምረው በሞሮኮ አዲስ ቲፊናቅ መደበኛ ሁኔታ አገኝቷል። የ«ቲፊናቅ» ትርጉም «የፊንቄ ጽሕፈት» እንደ ሆነ ይታመናል። በጥንት በስሜን አፍሪቃ ከሠፈሩት ዘሮች መካከል የፊንቄ ወይም ከነዓን ሰዎች በተለይ በቀርታግና ዙሪያ እንደ ነበሩ ታውቋል። ፊንቄያውያንም የአልፋቤት አባቶች በመሆናቸው የስሜን አፍሪቃ ኗሪዎች ከነርሱ የተማሩበት ወቅት ግን አይታወቅም። የአሁን ሊቃውንት ከ500 ዓክልበ አስቀድሞ አይሆንም ሲሉ ለዚህ መልስ ማስረጃ የለም። የቲፊናቅ ጽሕፈት ከጥንታዊ የሊብያ በርበሮች ጽሕፈት ጋር ተመሳሳይነት ስላለው አደረጃጀቱ በዚህ ሊታይ ይችላል። የውጭ መያያዣ ቲፊናቅ በኦምኒግሎት] ጽሕፈቶች ኒጄር ማሊ ሞሮኮ
__label__am ንጥረ ነገር በታሪክ ንጥረ-ነገር (elements) ፡ በግእዝ የሚታወቅ ክስተት ነው። «ፎር ኤሌሜንት»` በግእዝ አራቱ ባሕርያት ይባላል ። ይህ ዕውቀት በጥንቱ ዘመን ተንሰራፍቶ የነበረ ሲሆን አብዛኞች ከባቢሎኒያኑ ኤኑማ ኤሊኒስ (ከክርስቶስ ልደት በፊት በ18-16ኛው ክፍለ ዘመን መካከል የተጻፈ) ጽሁፍ እንደተነሳ ያምናሉ። በዚህ ጽሁፍ መሰረት የሁሉ ነገር መሰረቶች ፡- ባህር፣ ሰማይ፣ መሬትና ነፋስ ናቸው። ለዚህ ሌላ አምራጭ ያለው ፤ ስረ-መሰረት ስረ-ምንጭ፡ የሚለው ቃል ነው ። ነገር ግን በዘመናት ሂደት ይህ እውቀት እየተሻሻለ መጥቶ በኋላ ላይ አራቱ የተፈጥሮ ስረ መሰርት፦ እሳት፣ ዉሃ፣ መሬት፣ አየር ናቸው ተባለ። ይህ በግዕዙ ሰፍሮ የሚገኝ ዕውቀት ነው። ስለ ንጥረ ነገር ትርጓሜ አንድ ቁስ ነገርን አካሉን የገነቡት የመሰረት ድንጋዮች። መሰረቱን ያቀናበሩት ነገሮች። መስራች ነገሮች። ጡብ ለቤት አንደኛው መስራች ነገር ነው። የሚገነቡት ነገሮች። አፈጣጠር። ንጥረ መሰረት፣ ወይም ንጥሬት። መሠርዮት፡ ያፈጣጠር ፎርም፡ ያፈጣጠር ይዘቱ። የመሰረት አንጃው። የተሰራበት ቅመማ-ቅመሙ። አካላዊ ክፍል። የተቀናበረበት ነገር።
__label__am ክሪስቲና አማ አታ አዪዶ በማርች 23፣ 1942 እ.ኤ.አ. ጋና ውስጥ ተወለደች። ትምህርቷን በዌስሊ የልጃገረዶች ትምህርት ቤት፣ በመቀጠልም በጋና ዩኒቨርስቲ ተከታትላ በ1964 ዓ.ም በእንግሊዝኛ ቋንቋ የመጀመሪያ ዲግሪዋን ተቀብላለች። የመጀመሪያ የድርሰት ስራዋ የሆነውን «The Dilemma of a Ghost»ን በዚያ ዓመት ለማጠናቀቅ የበቃች ሲሆን ይሄው ድርሰቷ በሎንግማን አሳታሚ ድርጅት አማካይነት በቀጣዩ ዓመት ታትሞላታል። አዪዶ በልብ-ወለድ ደራሲነት ብቻ አይደለም እውቅናን ያተረፈችው፤ በጸሃፌ-ተውኔትነት እና ገጣሚነትም እንጂ። ጽሁፎቿ በአብዛኛው የዘመኑ የአፍሪካ ሴቶች ስላላቸው ሚና እና የምእራባዊው ባህል ስለሚያሳድርባቸው ኢርቱእ ተጽኖ ላይ የሚያተኩሩ ናቸው። አዪዶ በ1982 የጋና የትምህርት ሚኒስትር ሆና ብትሾምም በስራው ላይ የቆየችው ለ18 ወራት ያህል ብቻ ነው። በአሁኑ ወቅት በብራውን ዩኒቨርስቲ የአፍሪካ ጥናት ክፍል ውስጥ ተጋባዥ ፕሮፌሰር በመሆን ትሰራለች። የሥነ-ጽሁፍ ሥራዎች Dilemma of a Ghost (1965) Anowa (በጋና አፈታሪክ ላይ ተመስርቶ የተጻፈ ተውኔት፣ 1970) No Sweetness Here (የአጫጭር ታሪኮች መድብል፣ 1970) Our Sister Killjoy (1977) Someone Talking to Sometime (የግጥም መድብል፣ 1986) The Eagle and the Chicken (1986) Birds and Other Poems (የህጻናት መጽሃፍ፣ 1988) Changes: A Love Story (1991) An Angry Letter in January (የግጥም መድብል፣ 1992) The Girl Who Can and Other Stories (1997) የአፍሪካ ጸሓፊዎች ጋና
__label__am ሰኔ ፪ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ ዘመን አቆጣጠር የዓመቱ ፪፻፸፪ኛው ቀን ሲሆን የፀደይ (በልግ)ወቅት ፷፯ኛው ቀን ነው። ከዚህ ዕለት በኋላ እስከ ዓመቱ መጨረሻ ድረስ፣ በ ዘመነ ሉቃስ ፺፬ ቀናት፣ በዘመነ ዮሐንስ፤ በ ዘመነ ማቴዎስ፤ እና በ ዘመነ ማርቆስ ደግሞ ፺፫ ቀናት ይቀራሉ። ታሪካዊ ማስታወሻዎች ፲፱፻፷፫ ዓ/ም - የወባን በሽታ ከኢትዮጵያ ለማጥፋት፣ የንጉሠ ነገሥቱ መንግሥትና የአሜሪካ መንግሥት ስምምነት ተፈራረሙ።. ልደት ዕለተ ሞት ዋቢ ምንጮች P.R.O., FCO 31/1118 - ETHIOPIA: ANNUAL REVIEW FOR 1971 ዕለታት
__label__am ታምራት ላይኔ የኢትዮጵያ ፖለቲካ ሰው ነበሩ። ደርግን ለማስወገድ በተደረገው የትጥቅ ትግል፣ መጀመርያ የኢህአፓ ታጋይ፤ ከዛም ኢህአፓ ሲዳከም፤ ኢህድን (የኢትዮጵያ ህዝቦች ዲሞክራቲክ ንቅናቄ) መስራችና አመራር ነበሩ። ቆራጥ የወታደራዊ አመራርና ጎበዝ ገጣሚ እንደነበሩ የትግል አጋሮቻቸው ይመሰክራሉ። የኢሕአዴግ መንግሥት ጠቅላይ ሚኒስትር በመሆን ሲሠሩ ከቆዩ በኋላ በሙስና ተከስሰው የ18 ዓመት ጽኑ እስራት ተፈረደባቸው። ከ18ቱ ዓመት 12ቱን ከጨረሱ በኋላ በታኅሣስ ወር አጋማሽ 2001 ዓመተ ምሕረት በአመክሮ ተፈቱ። በእስር ቤት በቆዩበት ጊዜ ከከሃዲነት ወይም አምላክ የለሽነት ወደ አማኝነት የተለወጡ ሲሆን ሲፈቱ የመሰከሩትም ይህንኑ ነበር። አንዳንድ ወሬዎች እንደሚናፈሱት ሆነ ግን 12 ጻመት ወሀኒ ያወረዳቸው ሙሰና ብቻ ሳይሆን የፖለቲካ ሽኩቻም ነው ይባላል። የውጭ መያያዣ ዜና በኢ.ቴቪ. የኢትዮጵያ ካቢኔ አባላት
__label__am 14 March በጎርጎርያን ካሌንዳር የቀን ስም በእንግሊዝኛ ሲሆን ይህ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ አቆጣጠር (ከ1892 ዓ.ም. ጀምሮ እስከ 2091 ዓ.ም. ድረስ) ምንጊዜም መጋቢት 5 ቀን ማለት ነው። ከ1892 ዓ.ም. አስቀድሞ ወይም ከ2091 ዓ.ም. በኋላ ለሆኑት ዓመታት ግን በሌላ ቀን ላይ መሆኑን ይገንዘቡ። ለእነዚያ ዓመቶች ይህ የቀን መለወጫ መሣርያ ይረዳል። የፈረንጅ ቀኖች
__label__am አን-ናሲር ሰላሃዲን ዩሱፍ ኢብን አዩብ (አረብኛ: صلاح الدين يوسف بن أيوب) (1129-1185 ዓም) በአብዛኛው ሰላሁዲን በመባል የሚታወቅ ሲሆን የአዩቢድ ሥርወ መንግሥት መሥራች እና የሁለቱ ቅዱስ መስጊዶች ጠባቂ የሚለው ማዕረግ የተሰጠው የመጀመሪያው ሰው ነበር። መሪዎች የግብፅ ታሪክ ሶርያ የእስያ ታሪክ
__label__am ጳጉሜን ጳጉሜን የወር ስም ሆኖ በነሐሴ እና በመስከረም ወራት መኻል የሚገኝ ከአስራ ሦስቱ ኢትዮጵያ የወራት አቆጣጠር ውስጥ የመጨረሻው እና አሥራ ሦስተኛው (፲፫ ኛው) የወር ስም ነው። «ጳጉሜን» በኢትዮጵያ ዘመን አቆጣጠር ዘመነ ዮሐንስ ሥግር ዓመት (በጎርጎርያዊ አቆጣጠር leap year) በመሆኑ ስድስት (፮) ዕለታት አሉት። በዘመነ ልቆስ፣ ዘመነ ማቴዎስ እና በዘመነ ማርቆስ አምስት (፭) ዕለታት አሉት። «ጳጉሜን» የሚለው ስም ምንጩ ከግሪክ ቋንቋ ሲሆን <<ቀሪ ዕለታት>> ማለት ነው። ነሐሴ የክረምት ሦስተኛው ወር ነው። ኢትዮጵያ በአለም ብቸኛዋ የ13 ወራት ጸጋ ባለቤት ናት። ይህ የፓጉሜን ወር በኢትዮጵያውያን ዘንድ የምህረት ወር ተብሎ ይታመናል። ወደ አዲስ አመት መግቢያ (መሸጋገርያ) ወርም ነው። ዋቢ ምንጮች ወራት
__label__am ሮበርት ሑክ (ከ18 ጁላይ 1635 እስከ 3 ማርች 1703 እ.ኤ.አ. የኖረ) እንግሊዛዊ ተመራማሪ ነበር። ሁክ ባደረጋቸው ሙከራዎችም ሆነ ሃሳባዊ መላምቶች ለሳይንስ በተለይም ለሥነ ሕይወት ጥናት እድገት ከፍተኛ አስተዋፆ አንድርጓል። በተለይም Cell የሚለውን የእንግሊዝኛ ቃል ለመጀመሪያ ጊዜ በመጠቀም ህዋስን መግለፁ እና የሁክ ህግ (Hooke's law) የሚባለውን በመፍጠር ይታወቃል። የእንግሊዝ ሰዎች ሥነ ሕይወት ሳይንቲስቶች
__label__am ሶዶ ዙሪያ ወረዳ ወላይታ ዞን ከሚገኙ ወረዳዎች አንዱ ነው። ወረዳው በስተምዕራብ በኪንዶ ኮይሻ ወረዳ፥ በበስተሰሜን በቦሎሶ ሶሬ ወረዳ ፥ በስተሰሜን ምሥራቅ በዳሞት ጋሌ ውረዳ፥ እንዲሁም ደግሞ በበስተደቡብ ምዕራብ በኦፋ ወረዳ ይዋሰናል። የህዝብ ቁጥር በ1999 ዓ.ም በማዕከላዊ ስታቲስቲክስ ኤጀንሲ በተደረገው ህዝብ ቆጠራ መሰረት በወረዳው በአጠቃላይ 162,691 ሰው የሚኖር ሲሆን፥ ከነዚህም 80,002 ወንድ ሲሆኑ 82,689 ደግሞ ሴት ናቸው፤ ማናቸውም የከተማዊ አይደሉም። በሶዶ የወረዳዉ ዋና መቀመጫ ነው። የሚበዙት የፕሮቴስታንት እምነት ተከታይ ሲሆኑ፥ 66.67% ያህሉን ይይዛሉ፤ 26.83% የሚሆኑት ኦርቶዶክስ ተዋሕዶ አብያተ ክርስቲያን እና 5.28% የሮማ ካቶሊክ ቤተ ክርስቲያን እምነት ተከታይ ናቸው። በ1986 ዓ.ም በማዕከላዊ ስታቲስቲክስ ኤጀንሲ በተደረገው ህዝብ ቆጠራ መሰረት በወረዳው ከወላይታ (92.81%) በተጨማሪ፣ አማራ ብሔር (2.6%)፥ ጋሞ (0.85%)፥ ዶርዜ (0.77%) እና ስልጤ (0.76%) እንዲሁም ሌሎችም ብሔር ብሔረሰቦች (2.21%) ይገኙበታል። ዋቢ የኢትዮጵያ ወረዳዎች
__label__am ዲማ በምስራቅ ጎጃም፣ እነማይ ወረዳ የሚገኝ ከተማ ነው። ይህ ቦታ በተለይ እውቅና እሚያገኘው የዲማ ጊዮርጊስን ቤተክርስቲያንና መናኞችና ሌሎች የሚጠለሉበት ገዳም በማቀፉ ነው። በዓፄ ሱሰንዮስ ዘመን የነበሩትን ዓፄ ያዕቆብን ደግፈው ሲዋጉ በጎል ጦርነት ድል የሆኑት ራስ አትናቴዎስ በዲማ ገዳም እንደተጠለሉ በዚያው ዘመን የተጻፉ ድርሳናት ይገልጻሉ። እንዲሁ ደጃዝማች ጎሹ ዘውዴ ልጃቸው ብሩ ጎሹ ሲያምጽ በዲማ ገዳም እንደተጠለሉ እንግሊዙ ሲ ቲ ቤኬ ዘግቦት ይገኛል። በ19ኛው ክፍለ ዘመን፣ የዲማ ጊዮርጊስ፣ ጎጃም ውስጥ ከሚገኙ አብያተ ክርስቲያናት ሁሉ ትልቁ ነበር። ቤተ ክርስቲያኑ በ2 ሜትር ከፍታ የድንጋይ አጥር የታጠረ ሲሆን ውስጡ ብዙ ታሪካዊ መጻሕፍትን አካቶ ይዟል። በ1513 ዓ.ም. በአውሮጳውያን ስልት የተሳሉ የዓፄ ናዖድ እና ዓፄ ልብነ ድንግል ምስሎች በቤተርክስቲያኑ በሚገኙ መጽሐፍት ይታያሉ። ማጣቀሻ እነማይ የኢትዮጵያ ከተሞች
__label__am ሮበርት ገብርኤል ሙጋቤ (ደቡባዊ ሮዴዥያ የካቲት 21 ቀን 1916 እ.ኤ.አ.-ሲንጋፖር ፣ መስከረም 6 ቀን 2011 እ.ኤ.አ.) 1 የፖለቲካ እና ወታደራዊ ሰው ዚምባብዌ ሰብስበው ከ 1980 እስከ 2017 እ.ኤ.አ. ባለው ጊዜ ውስጥ የአገሪቷ ከፍተኛ መሪ ነበሩ። ጠቅላይ ሚኒስትርና በኋላ ላይ ፕሬዚዳንቱ የሕገ-መንግስት እና የመንግሥት መሪ የሆነውን አንድነትን ከህገ-መንግስት ማሻሻያ በኋላ በ 1987 ዓ.ም. ሙግቤ በስልጣን ላይ ለመልቀቅ እስኪገደድ ድረስ አገሪቱን ለ 37 ዓመታት ገዝቷል ። በ 93 ዓመቱ ሙጋቤ እስከ 2017 ድረስ በዓለም ረጅም ዕድሜ ያስቆጠረ ፕሬዝዳንት ሆነ ። ዚምባብዌ የአፍሪካ መሪዎች
__label__am ጥሊሊ ከቡሬ በስተ ምራባዊ ሰሜን የሚገኝ ትንሽ ከተማ ነው። በ1960 ከተማው የቆላ ደጋ ዳሞት አውራጃ አካል የነበር ሲሆን በዚሁ ዘመን የከተማው አንደኛ ደረጃ ትምህርት ቤት 260 ወንዶችና 55 ሴት ተማሪዎች እንዲሁም 6 አስተማሪዎች ነበሩት። ካርታ http://wikimapia.org/#lat=10.8528735&lon=37.0200634&z=14&l=0&m=b&search=Tilili%20 ማጣቀሻ ጎጃም
__label__am 8 March በጎርጎርያን ካሌንዳር የቀን ስም በእንግሊዝኛ ሲሆን ይህ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ አቆጣጠር (ከ1892 ዓ.ም. ጀምሮ እስከ 2091 ዓ.ም. ድረስ) ምንጊዜም የካቲት 29 ቀን ማለት ነው። ከ1892 ዓ.ም. አስቀድሞ ወይም ከ2091 ዓ.ም. በኋላ ለሆኑት ዓመታት ግን በሌላ ቀን ላይ መሆኑን ይገንዘቡ። ለእነዚያ ዓመቶች ይህ የቀን መለወጫ መሣርያ ይረዳል። የፈረንጅ ቀኖች
__label__am ሜክሲኮ ከተማ (እስፓንኛ፦ Ciudad de México /ሲዩዳድ ዴ ሜሒኮ/) የሜክሲኮ ዋና ከተማ ነው። ከተማው ቴኖችቲትላን ተብሎ የተመሠረተው በመጋቢት 14 ቀን 1317 ዓ.ም. በአዝቴክ (መሺካ) ኗሪዎች ነበር። የሚኖርበት የህዝብ ቁጥር የአካባቢውን ኗሪ ሲጨምር 19,231,829 ሆኖ ሲገመት የራሱ የከተማው ኗሪ ቁጥር ደግሞ 8,720,916 ሆኖ ይገመታል። ከተማው ላይ ተቀምጦ ይገኛል። ዋና ከተሞች የሜክሲኮ ከተሞች
__label__am ባቫሪያ ፣ በሙሉ ስሙ ነጻ የባቫሪያ አስተዳደር (ጀርመንኛ፦ Freistaat Bayern /ፍሪሽታት ባየርን/) ደቡብ ምስራቅ ጀርመን ውስጥ የሚገኝ ክፍለ ሃገር ነው። 70,548 ስኩየር ኪ/ሜትር ስፋት ሲኖረው፣ ከማናቸውም የጀርመን ክፍላተ ሃገሮች የበለጠ የቆዳ ስፋት አለው። ይህ ግዛት የጀርመንን አጠቃላይ ስፋት አንድ አምስተኛ (20%) ይሸፍናል። ከኖርስ ራይን ዌስትፋሊያ ክፍለሃገር ቀጥሎ ባቫሪያ ብዙውን የጀርመን ህዝብ ይይዛል። (12.5 ሚሊየን)። ሙኒክ የባቫሪያ ዋና ከተማ ነው። የጀርመን ክፍላገራት
__label__am አምክንዮ ማለት አንድን እውነት ከሌላ እውነት ጋር የሚያያይዝ መሳሪያ ማለት ነው ። ይህ የሚያሳየው የአምክንዮ ተፈጥሮ እውነትን ማግኘት ሳይሆን፣ እውነትን ማስተሳሰር ነው። በዚህ ትስስር ላይ ግን ፣ ብዙ ስህተቶች ይፈጠራሉ ( የማይያዙ እዉነታወችን ማያያዝ ፣ ያልተያያዙ እውነታወችን የተያያዙ ማስመሰል ፣ ወዘተ .. )። እነዚህን ስህተቶች የፍልስፍናና ሒሳብ ተማሪወች የአምክንዮ -ምክነት logical fallacy በማለት ሰብስበዋቸዋል ። 1. adhominem እሱኮ ፦ ምሳሌ ፦ አበበ ፦ መንገዶች እየተጣበቡ ስለሆነ ሌሎች መንግዶች መሰራት አለባቸው ። መሰረት ፦ አንተኮ ታክስ እንኳ አልከፈልክም ፣ ስለመንገድ እና ስለ መንግስት ስራ አታውቅም። እዚህ ላይ ፣ መሰረት የሰራችው ስራ adhominem/እሱኮ ይባላል ምክንያቱም አበበ ያነሳውን ጥሩ ነጥብ ከመወያየት ይልቅ ከነጥቡ ጋር ጭራሽ ግንኙነት የሌለ ነገር አንስታ ውይይቱን ዘጋች ። 2. appeal to force/ ዋ ! ምሳሌ ፦ አበበ ፦ መቸ ነው የሀገራችን ህዝብ ከርሀብ የሚዎጣው ? ማሞ ፦ አሜሪካ ገብተህ ዝም ብለህ ትዘባርቃለህ ። ማሞ እንግዲህ ለማለት የፈለገው አሜሪካ ባትገባ ኑሮ ይህን ነጥብ አታነሳም ነበር ። የማያነሳበት ምክንያት ፣ ምግብ ስለተትረፈረፍ ሳይሆን ፣ ይህን ነጥብ ቢያነሳ ሚደርስበት ነገር ስላለ ነው ። ይህ ዋ ! የሚባለው ምክነት ነው ። 3.red herring/ሸወዳ አበበ ፦ ትላንትና ባክሽ የትራፊክ ትኬት አገኘሁ መሰረት ፦ እንዳትከፍል ! ስንት ሰው ገዳይ ወንጀለኛ እያለ አንት እምትቀጣበት ምንም ምክንያት የለም ። ይህ እንግዲህ ያልተገናኝቶ-ገብያ ዋና መሰረት ነው። አንድ ሰው የሚናገረው ነጥብ ደስ ሳይለን ሲቀር ፣ ሌላ የማይገኛኝ ነገር አንስተን በመሸወድ ሀሳቡን እንዳይጨርስ ስናደርግ ሽወዳ red herring ይባላል ። ሌላ ምሳሌ ፦ እናት ለአስተማሪ ፦ ልጀ ፈተና ላይ ኮርጃለች ብለህ ታምን ይሆናል ፣ ነገር ግን ይችን ትንሽ ምስኪን ልጅ እንደገና ፈተና እንድትወስድ ስታደርግ ለህሊናህ አይከብደህም የአምክንዮ ምክነት
__label__am 11 November በጎርጎርያን ካሌንዳር የቀን ስም በእንግሊዝኛ ሲሆን ይህ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ አቆጣጠር (ከ1892 ዓ.ም. ጀምሮ እስከ 2091 ዓ.ም. ድረስ) በዘመነ ማቴዎስ፣ በዘመነ ማርቆስና በዘመነ ሉቃስ ኅዳር 2 ቀን ማለት ነው። በዘመነ ዮሐንስ ግን (ዘመነ ሉቃስ የሥግር ዓመት በመሆኑ) ቀን ላይ ነው። ከ1892 ዓ.ም. አስቀድሞ ወይም ከ2091 ዓ.ም. በኋላ ለሆኑት ዓመታት ግን በሌላ ቀን ላይ መሆኑን ይገንዘቡ። ለእነዚያ ዓመቶች ይህ የቀን መለወጫ መሣርያ ይረዳል። የፈረንጅ ቀኖች
__label__am ሥነ ስብስብ የሒሳብ ቅርንጫፍ ሲሆን ትኩረት ሰጥቶ የሚያጠናው ስብስቦችን ነው። ስብስብ ማለቱ ተለይተው ሊታወቁ የሚችሉ ነገሮችን ክምችት ወይም ቡድን ነው። የሥነ ስብስብ ኅልዮት በጣም መሰረታዊ ከመሆኑ የተነሳ ማናቸውንም የሒሳብ ቅርንጫፎች በርሱ ቋንቋ መጻፍና መተርጎም ይቻላል። ከቀላልነቱም አንጻር በመዋዕለ ሕጻናትና በአንደኛ ደረጃ ትምህርትቤቶች ደረጃ ሳይቀር ለህጻናት ቢቀርብ ምንም ጉዳት አያመጣም። የስብስብ ውህደትና የጋራ መተግበሪያወች እንዲሁም ቬን ዲያግራምና ኦይለር ዳያግራም በአንደኛ ደረጃ ትምህርት ቤቶች ሊሰጡ ይችላሉ፣ ከበድ ያሉት እንደ ተቆጣሪነት አይነት ጽንሰ ሃሳቦች በኮሌጅ ደረጃ ይቀርባሉ። ሥነ ስብስብ የተመሰረተው በ1860ወቹ በጆርጅ ካንተር እና ሪቻርድ ደደኪንድ በተሰኙ የሂሳብ ተማሪወች ነበር። እኒህ ተመራማሪወች፣ በተለይ ካንተር፣ የዋህ ሥነ ስብስብ ተብሎ አሁን የሚታወቀውን ጥናት መሰረት ቢጥልም በ20ኛ ክፍለ ዘመን መጀመሪያ ላይ በበርትራንድ ረስልና ሌሎችም ተማሪወች የዚህ አዲሱ የሂስብ ዘርፍ ኃልዮት ለርስ በርስ ቅራኔ እንደሚያበቃ በማስረዳታቸው ዘርፉ ሊሻሻል በቃ። ይህ አዲሱ የሥነ ስብስብ ስርዓት እሙናዊ የስብስብ ኅልዮት በመባል ይታወቃል። ደግሞ ይዩ፦ ስብስብ የዋህ ሥነ ስብስብ ሥነ ስብስብ
__label__am Jason King (ጄሰን ኪንግ) ከ1971 እስከ 1972 እ.ኤ.አ. ድረስ የተሠራ የእንግሊዝ አገር ቴሌቪዝን ፕሮግራም ነበር። ከቀደመው ተመሳሳይ ፕሮግራም Department S (1969-70 እ.እ.አ.) የተከታተለ ነበር። በትርዒቱ ውስጥ ጄሰን ኪንግ (ፒተር ውንጋርድ) በሎንዶን የሚኖር ልብ ወለድ ደራሲ ነው። የሚጽፈውም ልብ ወለድ ስለ ወንጀል መርማሪ ዠብዱዎች ነው። ቢባልም ሰውየው ጄሰን ኪንግ የራሱን ዠብዱዎች መቸም አያጣም። በተለይ የሚያዝናናው የዘመኑ ደማቅ ዝንጠኛነት ሲሆን በኢትዮጵያም ተቀባይነት ካገኙት ባዕድ ፕሮግራሞች መኃል ተቆጥሯል። የቴሌቪዥን ትርዒት ዩናይትድ ኪንግደም
__label__am ኤሽኑና የሱመር ጥንታዊ ከተማ ነበር። ዛሬው ሥፍራው ተል አስማር ተብሎ በዘመናዊው አገር ኢራቅ ውስጥ በዲያላ ወንዝ ሸለቆ ይገኛል። ኤሽኑና ከስሜኑ ተራሮች ወደ መስጴጦምያ በደረሰው መንገድ ላይ ስለተቀመጠ የብርቅ ሸቀጦች (ፈረስ፣ ሰንፔር፣ ዕንቁዎች ወዘተ.) ንግድ ማዕከል ሆነና በለጸገ። የአካድ መንግሥት እየደከመ (በሹዱሩል ዘመን 2001-1986 ዓክልበ. ግ.) ኤሽኑና በአካድ ቅሬታ ግዛት ውስጥ እንደ ቀረ ይታወቃል። ከዚያ የኤላም ንጉሥ ኩቲክ-ኢንሹሺናክ ያዘው። ከዚህ በኋላ ለዑር መንግሥት ተገዥ ሆነ፤ ከዚያ በተራው ለኢሲንና ለላርሳ ተገዛ። አንዳንድ የኤሽኑና ገዢ ግን እንደ ነጻ ንጉሥ ይገዛ ነበር። 2 ኢፒቅ-አዳድ 1771-1729 ዓክልበ. በተለይ ለኤሽኑና ሰፊ ግዛት አሸነፈ። በመጨረሻ በ1674 ዓክልበ. ኤሽኑና ለባቢሎን ንጉሥ ሃሙራቢ ወደቀ። የኤሽኑና ሕግጋት ደግሞ ለሥነ ቅርስ ታውቀዋል፤ የትኛው ንጉሥ እንዳወጣቸው ግን እርግጥኛ አይደለም። የኤሽኑና ነገሥታት (ኡልትራ አጭር) - ኢቱሪያ - ገዥ (ኤንሲ) ለዑር-፫ መንግሥት 1910-1904 - ሹ-ኢሊያ 1904-1896 - ኑራኹም - ገዥ ለዑር 1896-1886 - ኪሪኪሪ - ገዥ 1886-1872 - ቢላላማ - ገዥ ለኢሲን - ኢሻር-ራማሹ - ገዥ - ኡሹር-አዋሱ - ገዥ - አዙዙ - ገዥ - ኡር-ኒንማርኪ - ገዥ - ኡር-ኒንጊዚዳ - ገዥ 1806-1793 - 1 ኢፒቅ-አዳድ 1793-1791 - ሳሪያ - ገዥ 1784-1778 - ዋራሣ - ገዥ 1791-1784 - በላኩም - ገዥ 1778-1771 - 1 ኢባልፒኤል 1771-1729 - 2 ኢፒቅ-አዳድ 1729-1719 - ናራም-ሲን 1719-1718 - ኢብኒ-ኤራ 1718-1716 - ኢቂሽ-ቲሽፓክ 1716-1712 - ዳኑም-ታሃዝ 1712-1692 - ዳዱሻ 1692-1680 - 2 ኢባልፒእል 1680-1674 - ሲሊ-ሲን የሱመር ከተሞች
__label__am 11 September በጎርጎርያን ካሌንዳር የቀን ስም በእንግሊዝኛ ሲሆን ይህ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ አቆጣጠር (ከ1892 ዓ.ም. ጀምሮ እስከ 2091 ዓ.ም. ድረስ) በዘመነ ማቴዎስ፣ በዘመነ ማርቆስና በዘመነ ሉቃስ መስከረም 1 ቀን ማለት ነው። በዘመነ ዮሐንስ ግን (ዘመነ ሉቃስ የሥግር ዓመት በመሆኑ) ቀን ላይ ነው። ከ1892 ዓ.ም. አስቀድሞ ወይም ከ2091 ዓ.ም. በኋላ ለሆኑት ዓመታት ግን በሌላ ቀን ላይ መሆኑን ይገንዘቡ። ለእነዚያ ዓመቶች ይህ የቀን መለወጫ መሣርያ ይረዳል። የፈረንጅ ቀኖች
__label__am አስፈላጊ ጥሬ ዕቃዎች ግማሽ ኪሎ ግራም ተቀቅሎ በደንብ የተጠነፈፈ ፓስታ 2 የሾርባ ማንኪያ ዘይት 2 መካከለኛ ጭልፋ (200 ግራም) ቺዝ 4 የሾርባ ማንኪያ (100 ግራም) የገበታ ቅቤ 5 መካከለኛ ጭልፋ ቢሻሜል ሶስ 5 መካከለኛ ጭልፋ ቦሎኔዝ ሶስ 3 እንቁላል አዘገጃጀት 1. ፓስታውን ትልቅ ብረት ድስት ውስጥ በማድረግ ቦሎኔዝ ሶስና ሦስት ጭልፋ ቢሻሜል ሶስ መጨመር፤ 2. በጭልፋ አገላብጦ በደንብ ማቀላቀልና እንቁላሉን መትቶ በመጨመር ማዋሃድ፤ 3. የዳቦ መጋገሪያ ትሪ ዘይት ቀብቶ የተዘጋጀውን ውሁድ እንደ ዳቦ መጠፍጠፍ፤ 4. የተረፈውን ቦሎኔዝ ሶስና ቢሻሜል ሶስ በላዩ ላይ በመቀባት መሸፈንና ቺዝ ላዩ ላይ መነስነስ፤ 5. የገበታ ቅቤውን በማንኪያ ቆራርጦ ላዩ ላይ እያራራቁ ማድረግ፤ 6. ዳቦ መጋገሪያ (ፉርኖ ቤት) ውስጥ ከቶ ማብሰል፣ ወይም በትልቅ ብረት ድስት በመጠፍጠፍ በላይና በታች ከሰል አድርጐ መሥራት፤ 7. ወርቃማ ቀለም ሲያመጣ ማውጣት፤ 8. ቀዝቀዝ ሲል እንደ ዳቦ በደንብ አስተካክሎ ስምንት ቦታ ቆርጦ ማቅረብ፡፡ አበሳሰል
__label__am አራፕኻ በዛሬው ኪርኩክ፣ ኢራቅ በጥንታዊ ዘመን የተገኘ ከተማ ነበር። ከተማው ከ2000 ዓክልበ. ግድም ጀምሮ ሲታወቅ የጉቲዩም ዋና ከተማ ነበረ። ከዚህ በኋላ አራፕኻ የሑራውያን መንግሥት ሆነ። በ1742 ዓክልበ. የኤሽኑና ንጉሥ 2 ኢፒቅ-አዳድ ከተማውን ያዘው፣ እንዲሁም በ1693 ዓክልበ. የአሦር ንጉሥ 1 ሻምሺ-አዳድ ያዘው። በማሪ ንጉሥ ዝምሪ-ሊም ዘመን (1687-1675) አራፕኻ እንደገና ነጻ መንግሥት ነበር፤ ከትንሽ በኋላ ግን ለባቢሎን ንጉሥ ሃሙራቢ ተገዥ ሆነ። በሃሙራቢ ልጅ ሳምሱ-ኢሉና ዘመን ደግሞ ነጻ ግዛት ሆነ። ከተማው ትልቅ ሆኖ የጐረቤቱን ከተማ ኑዚን (የቀድሞው ጋሱር) በግዛቱ ውስጥ ያጠቅልል ነበር። ይህም የሚታኒ መንግሥት በ15ኛው ክፍለ ዘመን ዓክልበ. ግድም አራፕኻን እስከ ያዘው ድረስ ቆየ፤ ሚታኒም ከወደቀ በኋላ አራፕኻ ከአሦርና ከባቢሎን መካከል ለብዙ ዘመናት ይፈራረቅ ነበር። የቀድሞ ከተሞች
__label__am ታኅሣሥ ፳፪ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ ዘመን አቆጣጠር የዓመቱ ፻፲፪ተኛው እና የመፀው ወቅት ፹፯ተኛው ቀን ነው። ከዚህ ዕለት በኋላ እስከ ዓመቱ መጨረሻ ድረስ፣ በ ዘመነ ሉቃስ ፪፻፶፬ ቀናት በ ዘመነ ዮሐንስ፤ በ ዘመነ ማቴዎስ፤ እና በ ዘመነ ማርቆስ ደግሞ ፪፻፶፫ ቀናት ይቀራሉ። ዓቢይ ታሪካዊ ማስታወሻዎች ፲፱፻፵፰ ዓ/ም - የሱዳን ሪፑብሊክ ነጻነቷን ከምስር ሪፑብሊክ እና ከታላቋ ብሪታኒያ እና የአየርላንድ ሕብረታዊ ንጉዛት ተቀዳጀች። ፲፱፻፶፪ ዓ/ም - የካሜሩን ሪፑብሊክ ነጻነቷን ከ ፈረንሳይ እና ከታላቋ ብሪታኒያ እና የአየርላንድ ሕብረታዊ ንጉዛት ተቀዳጀች። ፲፱፻፹፭ ዓ/ም - የቀድሞዋ ቼኮዝሎቫኪያ በሰላማዊ ስምምነት ለሁለት ተከፍላ የቼክ ሪፑብሊክ እና ስሎቫኪያ በተባሉ ሉዐላዊ አገራት ተተካች። መገናኛ ብዙሀን ይሄንን ከፈላ ‘የሐር ፍች’ (Velvet Divorce) የሚል ሥያሜ ሰጥተውታል። ልደት ዕለተ ሞት ዋቢ ምንጮች {{en]] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/January_1 ዕለታት
__label__am ወይን በወይን ሐረግ (Vitis spp.) የሚወጣው ፍሬ ነው። ከዚህ ፍሬ ዘቢብ፣ ማርማላታና ወይን ጠጅ ሊሠሩ ይቻላል፤ ወይም ደግሞ ጥሬ ሆነው ይበላሉ። ወይን ሐምራዊ፣ ቀይ ነጭ ወይም አረንጓዴ ሊሆን ይችላል። ወይን ለሰው ጤናና ለእድሜ እጅግ መልካም ነው። ወይን ወይም ዘቢብ መብላት ለውሾች ግን መርዛም ነው፤ የኩላሊት ድካም ይፈጥርባቸዋል። የዚህ ምክንያት ለሳይንስ አይታወቅም። ፍራፍሬ
__label__am የተቃርኖ አራት ማዕዘን በአራቱ የተቃራኒ አይነቶች መካከል ያለውን ዝምድና እና ልዩነት የሚያሳይ የሥነ አመክንዮ ዘዴ ነው። ሁሉም ተቃርኖዎች አንድ አይነት አይደሉም። ለምሳሌ፦ ረቂቅ ፩) ሁሉም ሰው ኬኒያዊ ነው። ረቂቅ ፪) ምንም ሰው ኬኒያዊ ነው። ረቂቅ ፫) አንድ አንድ ሰዎች ኬኒያዊ አይደሉም። ረቂቅ ፬) አንድ አንድ ሰዎች ኬኒያዊ ናቸው። ረቂቅ ፩ን የሚመስሉ ዓይነት ዓረፍተ ነገሮች ሁለንተናዊ አዎታ ይባላሉ፤ ረቂቅ ፪ ሁለንተናዊ አሉታ ይባላል፣ ረቂቅ ፫ ልዩ አሉታ ሲባል፣ ረቂቅ ፬ ልዩ አዎንታ ይባላል። በረቂቅ ፩ እና ረቂቅ ፪ መካከል ያለው ተቃርኖ የተጻራሪ ዓይነት ይባላል። በ፩ እና ፫ መካከል ያለው ተቃርኖ የመጣረስ ዓይነት ሲሆን በ፩ እና ፬ መካከል ያለው ግንኙነት ደግሞ ንዑስ ተከታይ ሊባል ይቻላል። በ፫ እና ፬ መካከል ያለው ግንኙነት ንዑስ ተጻርኖ ይባላል። ቁጥር ፪ እና ቁጥር ፬ የመጣረስ ግንኙነት አላቸው። ሁለት ተጻራሪ ረቂቆች በአንድ ጊዜ ውሸት ሊሆኑ ይችላሉ፣ ግን በአንድ ጊዜ እውነት ሊሆኑ ከቶ አይችሉም። ሁለት የተጣረሱ ረቂቆች አንድ ላይ ውሸት ሊሆኑ አይችሉም፣ እንዲሁ አንድ ላይ እውነት ሊሆኑ ፍጹም አይችሉም። ሁለት ንዑስ ተጻርኖዎች አንድ ላይ እውነት ሊሆኑ ይችላሉ፣ ነገር ግን በአንድ ላይ ውሸት ሊሆኑ አይችሉም። ሁለት ንዑስ ተከታዮች አንድ ላይ እውነት ሊሆኑ ይችላሉ፣ እንዲሁ አንድ ላይ ውሸት ሊሆኑ ይችላሉ። ተቃርኖ ሥነ አምክንዮ
__label__am ገነተ ማርያም ቤተ ክርስቲያን በዓፄ ይኩኖ አምላክ የታነጸ፣ እንደ ላሊበላ ውቅር አብያተ ክርስቲያናት ከወጥ ድንጋይ የተቀረጸ ነው። የሚገኘውም ከላሊበላ በሰሜን-ምሥራቅ አቅጣጫ፣ ፳፬ ኪሎ ሜትር ርቀት ላይ፣ በድሮው የወልዲያ- ላሊበላ መንገድ አጠገብ ነው። ቤተ ክርስቲያኑ ፳፬ የውጭ እና ፬ የውስጥ አምዶች፣ ፳፬ መስኮቶች እና ፫ በሮች አሉት። በዚህ ቤተ ክርስቲያን የሚገኙት ስዕሎች በጥንታዊነታቸው ቀደምትነት ያላቸው ሲሆን በትክክልም ጊዜያቸው ይህ ነው ተብሎ ለመታወቅ ይመቻሉ። ማጣቀሻ አቡነ ዮሴፍ ተራራ አንጎት የኢትዮጵያ ታሪክ አብያተ ክርስቲያናት
__label__am እምዬ ቴሬሳ (1902-1989 ዓም) በኦቶማን መንግሥት ከአልባኒያዊ ዘር እንደ «አኘዘ ቦሓጂው ተወልደው ወደ ሕንድ አገር የፈለሱት መበሊት እና ሰባኪ ነበሩ። በ2008 ዓም በሮማን ካቶሊክ ፓፓ እንደ «ቅድሥስት ተሬሳ ዘካልካታ በመሰይም ዕውቅና ሰጣቸው። እናም ለሰው መብት ተቆርቋሪ እና ታጋይ ነበሩ። ሕንድ ክርስትና አልባኒያ የአውሮፓ ሰዎች
__label__am የቱርኪክ ቋንቋዎች ቤተሠብ በተለይ በእስያ የሚገኝ ታላቅ የቋንቋዎች ቤተሠብ ነው። ሁላቸው የደረሱ ከቅድመ-ቱርክኛ ነው። ሁለተ ዋና ቅርንጫፎቹ ኦጉራዊ ቋንቋዎች (አሁን ቹቫሽኛ አንድያ የተረፈው አባል ነው) እና የጋርዮሽ ቱርካዊ ቋንቋዎች ናቸው። ቅድመ-ቱርክኛ * ኦጉራዊ ቋንቋዎች ጥንታዊ ቡልጋርኛ * ኻዛርኛ * አቫርኛ * ሁንኛ * ቹቫሽኛ የጋርዮሽ ቱርካዊ ቋንቋዎች ጥንታዊ ቱርክኛ * / ሳይቤራዊ ጥንታዊ ዊጉርኛ * ምዕራብ ዩጉርኛ አልታይኛ ሳቃኛ ቱቫኛ ኻካስኛ ጫጋታይኛ * / ዊጉራዊ ኡዝበክኛ ዊጉርኛ ኦጉዝኛ * / ኦጉዛዊ ቱርክኛ ቱርክመንኛ አዘርኛ ኪፕቻክኛ * / ኪፕቻካዊ ታታርኛ ባሽኪርኛ ካዛክኛ ኪርጊዝኛ የክሪሜያ ታታርኛ ኻላጅኛ
__label__am ማሮን በግሪክ አፈ ታሪክ የማሮኔያ ከተማ መሥራች ነበር። በሆሜር ዘንድ በኦዲሴዎስ ዘመን (12ኛው ክፍለ ዘመን ዓክልበ. ግድም) ተገኘ፤ በዲዮዶሮስ ታሪክ ግን ከዚያ በፊት በኦሲሪስ አፒስ ዘመን (21ኛው ክፍለ ዘመን ዓክልበ. ግድም) የኖረው ሲሆን የአፒስ ሻለቃ ነበር። አፒስ ሊኩርጉስ (የጥራክያ ንጉሥ) ከገደለው በኋላ ለማሮን አደራ አገሩን ከዳኑብ ወንዝ እስከ ደማስቆ ድረስ እንደ ሰጠው ደግሞ ይባላል። የግሪክ አፈታሪክ
__label__am ፑዙር-ኤሽታር (ወይም ፑዙር-ኢሽታር) የማሪ ሻካናካ ወይም ገዥ ነበረ። ይህ ከ1922 እስከ 1897 ዓክልበ. ግድም ድረስ ነበር። የቱሪም-ዳጋን ልጅና ተከታይ ነበር። በተለይ የሚታወቀው በሥነ ቅርስ ስለ ሁለት ሐውልቶቹ ነው። ከአንድ ሰነድ ደግሞ ፩ኛው ዓመት የኡር ንጉሥ ሹልጊ ፵፬ኛው ዓመት መሆኑ ይታወቃል። የፑዙር-ኤሽታር ልጅ ሒትላል-ኤራ በሻካናካነት ተከተለው። የማሪ ነገሥታት
__label__am ሎጋይር ማክ ኒል ከ420 እስከ 454 ዓም ድረስ የአየርላንድ ከፍተኛ ንጉሥ ነበር። በአይርላንድ ዜና መዋዕሎች ዘንድ፣ ሰባኪው ቅዱስ ፓትሪክ በዚህ ዘመን በ424 ዓም ክርስትናን ለማስፋፋት በአይርላንድ ደረሰ። ንጉሡ ሎጋይር በአረመኔነት ቀረ፤ በመጨረሻ ሳይሞት እንደ ተጠመቁ ወይም እንዳልተጠመቁ ታሪኮቹ ይለያያሉ። የአየርላንድ አፈታሪካዊ ነገሥታት
__label__am የደም ቧንቧዎች የሥርዓተ ደም ዝውውር አካል ሲሆኑ ደምን በሙሉ አካል የሚሠራጭባቸው መንገዶች ናቸው። ሶስት ዓይነት የደም ቧንቧ ዓይነቶች አሉ። የመጀመሪያው የደም ቧንቧ ዓይነት ደም ቅዳ ወይም arteriesየሚባለው ሲሆን ደምን ከልብ ወደተለያዩ የሠውነት ክፍሎች የሚወስዱትን የደም ቧንቧዎች የሚወክል ነው። ሁለተኛው ደግሞ ፀጉር ደምስር ወይም ርቂት (capillaries) የሚባሉት ሲሆኑ ደም ከህዋሳቶች ጋር እንዲገናኝ ለተለያዩ ኬሚካላዊ አፀግብሮቶች መንገድ የሚያመቻቹ ናቸው። የሦስተኛው እና የመጨረሻው ደግሞ ደም መልስ ወይም veins የሚባሉት ሲሆኑ ደምን ከተለያዩ የሰውነት ክፍሎች ወደ ልብ የሚመልሱ ቧንቧዎች ናቸው። ሥነ አካል
__label__am የቾላ ሥርወ መንግሥት በደቡባዊ ሕንድ አገርና በኋላም በስሪ ላንካ ቢያንስ ከ300 ዓክልበ ጀምሮ እስከ 1271 ዓም የቆየ የታሚል ብሔር መንግሥት ነበረ። በሥነ ሕንጻ፣ በሥነ ጽሑፍ፣ በመርከብ ኃይልም ለሥልጣኔ አንጋፋዎች ሆኑ። ከታሪካዊ መዝገቦች እስከምናውቅ ድረስ ቢያንስ ከ300 ዓክልበ. ጀምሮ ተገኙ ሲባል፣ እንደ ልማዳዊ ታሪካቸው በጥንታዊ ታሚልኛ ሥነ ጽሑፍ ከዚያ በፊት ብዙ አፈ ታሪካዊ ነገሥታት ይጠቀሳሉ። ነገር ግን ለነዚህ ቅድመ-ታሪካዊ ነገሥታት፣ ማንኛውም ቅድመ-ተከተል ወይም ዘመናት መረዳት ያስቸግራል። በአንድ ግመት፣ መጀመርያው ቾላ ንጉሥ «ኤሪ ኦሊያን ቫኤንድሂ» የነገሠው ከ3028 ዓክልበ. ጀምሮ ቢሆን፣ ይህ ቁጥር ግን አጠያያቂ ነው። አንዱ አፈ ታሪካዊ የቾላ ንጉሥ ካንታማን በአጋስትያ (ከርግ ቬዳ ደራሲዎች አንዱ) ዘመን እንደ ኖረ ሲባል፣ ይህ ምናልባት 1200 ዓክልበ. አካባቢ ያደርገዋል፤ አጋስትያም ደግሞ በታሚሎች ትውፊት መሠረት ታሚሎቹን ከስሜን ወደ ደቡብ ሕንድ የመራቸው ቅዱስ ቄስ ነበረ። በታሪካዊ ዘመን ደግሞ ለረጅም ዘመን ስለ ታወቁ ብዙ ሥነ ጥበብና ኪነት ትተዋል። የእስያ ታሪክ ታሪካዊ አገሮች ሕንድ ስሪ ላንካ የህንዱ እምነት
__label__am ኅዳር ፳፬ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ ዘመን አቆጣጠር የዓመቱ ፹፬ኛው ቀን ነው። ከዚህ ዕለት በኋላ እስከ ዓመቱ መጨረሻ ድረስ፣ በ ዘመነ ሉቃስ ፪፻፹፪ ቀናት በ ዘመነ ዮሐንስ፤ በ ዘመነ ማቴዎስ፤ እና በ ዘመነ ማርቆስ ደግሞ ፪፻፹፩ ቀናት ይቀራሉ። ይሄ ዕለት የተባበሩት መንግሥታት ድርጅት ጥቅምት ፬ ቀን ፲፱፻፹፭ ዓ.ም. ባጸደቀው ስምምነት ቁጥር ፵፯⁄፫ “የዓለም አቀፍ የ’ድውያን’ ቀን” ተብሎ ተሰይሟል። ዓቢይ ታሪካዊ ማስታወሻዎች ፲፰፻፲፩ ዓ.ም. በመካከለኛው አሜሪካ የምትገኘው የኢሊኖይ ግዛት በሃያ አንድኛ ደረጃ ከአሜሪካ ሕብረት ጋር ተዋሃደች። ፲፱፻፳፪ ዓ/ም - አዲሱ የአዲስ አበባ የምድር ባቡር ጣቢያ ሕንፃ በዚህ ዕለት በአልጋ ወራሹ ራስ ተፈሪ መኮንን ተመርቆ ተከፈተ። ፲፱፻፷ ዓ.ም. በደቡብ አፍሪቃ የቀዶ ጥገና ሐኪም ዶክቶር ክርስቲያን ባርናርድ የመጀመሪያው የሰው ልብ በ ’ቀዶ ጥገና’ ጥበብ ከሟቹ ‘ዴኒስ ዳርቫል’ ወደተቀባዩ የልብ በሽተኛ ‘ሌዊስ ዋሽካንስኪ’ አጠናቀቁ። ፲፱፻፷፱ ዓ.ም. በጃማይካ የ’ሬጌ’ ሙዚቃ ባላባት ቦብ ማርሌይ ላይ የገደላ ሙከራ ተደረገ። በሁለት ጥይቶች ቢመታም ማርሌይ ከሁለት ቀን በኋላ መድረክ ላይ ወጣ። ፲፱፻፸፬ ዓ.ም. ሕንድ አገር ውስጥ በቦፓል ከተማ ፥ የአሜሪካው ዩኒየን ካርባይድ ( Union Carbide) የኬሚካል ኩባንያ ውስጥ በተከሰተው አደጋ መርዛዊ ኬሚካል አየሩን በክሎት ሦስት ሺህ ስምንት መቶ ሰዎች ሲሞቱ እስከ ስድስት መቶ ሺህ ሰዎች በአደጋው ምክንያት ጤናቸው እንደተበላሸ ይገመታል። ልደት ዕለተ ሞት ዋቢ ምንጮች (እንግሊዝኛ) http://www.bhopal.com/irs.htm (እንግሊዝኛ) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/December_3 ዕለታት
__label__am ግርማ ነጋሽ (፲፱፻፴፮ ዓ.ም.) ታዋቂ ኢትዮጵያዊ ድምፃዊ ነው። ግርማ ነጋሽ የተወለደው በ፲፱፻፴፮ ዓ.ም. በአዲስ አበባ ከተማ አራት ኪሎ አካባቢ ሲሆን ያደገው ከፍልውሃ በላይ ፊት በር ከሚባለው ሠፈር ነው። ግርማ ነጋሽ ወደ ሙዚቃው ዓለም ለመግባት ዋናው ምክንያት የሆነው ሙዚቃን መውደድ ብቻ ሳይሆን ከታዋቂው ጥላሁን ገሠሠ ጋር በአደጉበት አካባቢ በሠፈር ልጅነት መገናኘትና የቅርብ ጓደኛ መሆን ነው። መጀመሪያ በፖሊስ ሠራዊት ከዚያም በብሔራዊ ቲያር በመቀጠር ስምንት ያህል ሙዚቃዎችን ተጫውቷል። ለመጀመሪያ ጊዜ በመድረክ ላይ ይዞ የቀረባቸው ዘፈኖች «የኔ ሃሣብ»ና «ምነው ተለየሽኝ» በመባል የሚታወቁትን ነው። ዜማዎቹ የሌላ ቢሆኑም ለሰሚ ጅሮ ጥሩ ሆነው እንዲደርሱ በእኩሌታ ጥረት ያደረገባቸው በመሆኑ አብዛኞቹን ይወዳቸዋል። የቤተሰብ ሙያውን ባለመውደድ እና በተለያዩ ምክንያቶች የተነሳ ሙዚቃን የወደዳትን ይህል ፈጥኖ ሊታወቅባት ችሏል። ማጣቀሻ ናሽናል ቢብሊዮግራፊ ቡድን፣ የአንጋፋ አርቲስቶች መዝገበ የሕይወት ታሪክ፣ መጋቢት ፳፻፣ ገጽ 8 የኢትዮጵያ ዘፋኞች
__label__am 27 January በጎርጎርያን ካሌንዳር የቀን ስም በእንግሊዝኛ ሲሆን ይህ ቀን በኢትዮጵያ አቆጣጠር (ከ1892 ዓ.ም. ጀምሮ እስከ 2091 ዓ.ም. ድረስ) በዘመነ ማቴዎስ፣ በዘመነ ማርቆስና በዘመነ ሉቃስ ጥር 19 ቀን ማለት ነው። በዘመነ ዮሐንስ ግን (ዘመነ ሉቃስ የሥግር ዓመት በመሆኑ) ቀን ላይ ነው። ከ1892 ዓ.ም. አስቀድሞ ወይም ከ2091 ዓ.ም. በኋላ ለሆኑት ዓመታት ግን በሌላ ቀን ላይ መሆኑን ይገንዘቡ። ለእነዚያ ዓመቶች ይህ የቀን መለወጫ መሣርያ ይረዳል። የፈረንጅ ቀኖች
__label__am ትሪዮፓስ (Τριόπας) በግሪክ አፈ ታሪክ የአርጎስ ከተማ-አገር ንጉሥ ነበር። ካስቶር ዘሩድን የሚጠቅሱት ጸሃፊዎች ጄሮምና አውሳብዮስ እንደሚሉ፣ ትሪዮፓስ የአርጎስ ንጉሥ ሆኖ በአገሩ ለ46 ዓመታት ነገሠ፣ የፎርባስ ተከታይና ልጅ ይባላል። በፓውሳኒዮስ ዘንድ ልጆቹ ፐላስጎስ፣ ያሱስና አገኖር ነበሩ፤ ያሱስ እንደ ተከተለው ይላል። በጀሮምና አውሳብዮስ ግን የአገኖር ልጅ ክሮቶፖስ ተከተለው። የአርጎስ ነገሥታት
__label__am ጫማ አለም አቀፍ የርዝመት መለኪያ አሀድ ነው። በአለም ላይ ጫማ የተለያየ መጠን ያለው ቢሆንም በዋናነት የሚታወቀውን ከሌሎች የርዝመት መለኪያ አሀዶች ጋር ለማነጻጸር 1 ጫማ ከአንድ ሶስተኛ (0.3) ያርድ፣ 12 ኢንች፣ 0.3.480 ሜትር ጋር እኩል ነው። ሌላው የጫማ አይነት የሰርቬይ ጫማ የሚባለው ሲሆን 1 የሰርቬይ ጫማ ከ0.3048006 ሜትር ጋር እኩል ነው። የርቀት መለኪያ
__label__am ሙይነሞን በአይርላንድ አፈ ታሪክ ከ945 እስከ 940 ዓክልበ. ግድም ድረስ የአየርላንድ ከፍተኛ ነጉሥ ነበር። የአይርላንድ ታሪኮች እንዳሉት የሙይነሞን ዘመን ለ5 ዓመታት ቆየ። የላውድ አቆጣጠሮች (1014 ዓም ተቀነባብሮ) እና የድሮ አቆጣጠር በመከተል፣ ይህ ከ945 እስከ 940 ዓክልበ. ድረስ ይሆናል። (በኋላ የታዩት ታሪኮች ግን ከዚያ በፊት ያደርጉታል።) የአየርላንድ አፈታሪካዊ ነገሥታት
__label__am አስተርጓሚ ነኝ።
__label__am ገንዘቡን አገኘሁ።
__label__am አስተማሪ የለሁም።
__label__am እኔ ከካናዳ ነኝ።
__label__am አንደኛው ፎቅላይ ነው።
__label__am ምንም አያውቁም።
__label__am አንተ ተማሪ ነህ።
__label__am በሁለት ሰኣት ውስጥ፣ ወደ ቤት እንመጣለን።
__label__am አንተ ትልቅ ነህ።
__label__am በውነት ያስፈራል።
__label__am ይህን አልበልም።
__label__am አልፈልገውም።
__label__am የት መብላት ተፈልጋለህ?
__label__am መጥፎ ናቸው።
__label__am እንጃ።
__label__am አሜሪካዊ ነኝ።
__label__am እኔ ከዛምቢያ ነኝ።
__label__am ሴቷ ቆንጆ ናት።
__label__am ልጁ ይህች ቆንጆ ልጃገረድን ይወዳል።
__label__am ወደ ትምሕርት ቤት እሄዳለሁ።
__label__am የኔ መጽሃፍ እዚህ ነው።
__label__am አባትሽ ረጅም ነው።
__label__am ገደልኩዋት።
__label__am ቁጥሩን ስጠኝ።
__label__am መሄድ ይፈልጋል።
__label__am ቀጠሮው ከማን ጋር ነው?
__label__am ጥሩ ሴት ነች።
__label__am በሳምንት ከሁለት እስካስር ብር ነው።
__label__am ማንኪያውን ስጠኝ።
__label__am በሒሳብ በጣም ጐበዝ ነው።
__label__am ሰው ነኝ።
__label__am ልጆች የሕይወታችን አበባዎች ናቸው።
__label__am እኔ ማነኝ?
__label__am አነጋገፌ ትክክል ነውን?
__label__am ወደ ሱቅ እሄዳለሁ።
__label__am መጽሃፉን ስጠኝ።
__label__am ገደልኩው።
__label__am ተማሪዎች ነን።
__label__am ምን ማዘዝ ትፈልጋለህ?
__label__am መጽሃፉ ቀይ ነው።
__label__am አንቺ ቆንጆ ነሽ።
__label__am ስራ እየፈለግሁኝ ነው።
__label__am ሶስት ሰዓት ነው።
__label__am ጨረቃው ይበራል።
__label__am እሱ ዛፍ ስር ተኝቷል።
__label__am ጤና ይስጥልኝ!
__label__am መኪናቸው ጥሩ አይደለም።
__label__am ከቤቱ እስከ ባቡር ጣቢያ ድረስ ሄደ።
__label__am ሐኪም አይደለሁም።
__label__am ስሜ ጆን ነው።
__label__am እኔ ከክዮቶ ነኝ።
__label__am መጽሃፉን ሰጠው።
__label__am ተቈጥቼ ነበር።
__label__am አንቺ ተማሪ ነሽ።
__label__am በአስመራ ውስጥ ተወለድኩ።
__label__am አስተማሪ ነኝ።
__label__am ጋዜጠኛ ነኝ።
__label__am ስሜ አሕመድ ነው።
__label__am አስተማሪዎች ናችሁ።
__label__am እሱ በጣም ጥሩ ሐኪም ነው።
__label__am ቶም ብዙ ጊዜ ከውሻው ጋር ይናገራል።
__label__am ፈረንሳይኛን እየተመርኩ ነው።
__label__am ሴት ነኝ።
__label__am አጸደ እጫወታለሁ።
__label__am እንድማስበው ስህተት አለ።
__label__am እንደማምነው ከሆነ ስህተት አለ።
__label__am ሰውዬው አባቱን መጥራት ፈለገ።
__label__am አነጋግሬ ለየት ያለ ሊሆን ይችላል።
__label__am ወደ ትምሕርት ቤት እየሄድኩ ነው።
__label__am ይህ ሰው ማን ነው?
__label__am አንቺ ማን ነሽ?
__label__am እሱም አማርኛን እየተመርኩ ነው።
__label__am አንፈልገውም።
__label__am እንግዳ ነኝ።
__label__am እርስዎ ወደ አዲስ አበባ መቸ ይሄዳሉ?
__label__am የምትሄደው በተሳሳተ አቅጣጫ ነው።
__label__am እርሳስ አለዎት?
__label__am ተመሣሣይ እወስዳለሁ።
__label__am አንተ ማን ነህ?
__label__am ምን እየፍለግህ ነው?
__label__am ኢትዮጵያዊ ነህ?
__label__am አንተ አስተማሪ ነህ።
__label__am ሆቴል ትፈልጋለች።
__label__am በዚህ ሆቴል ውስጥ ባዶ ክፍል አለዎት?
__label__am ስሜ ቁዘይ አይደለም።
__label__am እንግሊዝኛን እየተማርኩ ነው።
__label__am እኔ ሐኪም ነኝ።
__label__am ወደ ትምሕርት ቤት ይሄዳል።
__label__am ቤቱን ዛሬ ታያላችሁ።
__label__am ጥሩ ተማሪ ነው።
__label__am ድመት አለኝ።
__label__am ነፍጡን ስጠኝ።
__label__am ዘግይቼ እትምሀርት ቤት ምን ጊዜም አልደርስም።
__label__am ተማሪ ነኝ።
__label__am ፓሊስ ነኝ።
__label__am እኔ ትልቅ ነኝ።
__label__am ሰው፡ሁሉ፡በሕግ፡ፊት፡እኩል፡ነው።፡ያለአንዳች፡ልዩነትም፡ሕጉ፡ደህንነቱን፡እንዲጠበቅለት፡እኩል፡የሆነ፡መብት፡አለው።፡ይህንን፡ውሳኔ፡በመጣስ፡ከሚደረግ፡ልዩነት፡ለማድረግ፡ከሚነሳሳ፡እንዲጠበቅ፡ሁሉም፡የእኩል፡መብት፡አለው።፡
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡በዚህ፡ውሳን፡ውስጥ፡የተዘረዘሩት፡መብቶችና፡ነጻነቶች፡በሙሉ፡በተግባር፡እንዲውሉ፡ለሚደረግባቸው፡የኀብረሰብና፡የኢንተርናሽናል፡ሥርዓት፡የመጠቀም፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡ጥቅሞቹን፡ለማስከበር፡የሙያ፡ማኀበሮችን፡ለማቋቋምና፡ማኀበርተኛ፡ለመሆን፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡የራሱ፡ነጻነትና፡ሙሉ፡መሻሻል፡በሚያገኝበት፡ኀብረሰብ፡ውስጥ፡የሚፈጽማቸው፡ግዴታዎች፡ይኖሩበታል።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡በመብቶቹና፡በግዴታዎቹ፡አፈጻጸም፡እንዲሁም፡በሚከሰስበት፡ማንኛውም፡ዓይነት፡የወንጀል፡ክስ፡ነጻ፡በሆነና፡በማያዳላ፡የፍርድ፡ሸንጎ፡በትክክለኛና፡በይፋ፡ጉዳዩ፡እንዲሰማለት፡የሙሉ፡እኩልነት፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡የመሥራት፡የሥራ፡ነጻ፡ምርጫና፡ለሥራም፡ትክክለኛና፡ተስማሚ፡የአሠራር፡ሁኔታዎችና፡ሥራም፡እንዳያጣ፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am አካለ፡መጠን፡የደረሱ፡ወንዶችና፡ሴቶች፡በዘር፡በዜግነት፡ወይም፡በሃይማኖት፡ልዩነት፡ሳይወሰኑ፡ጋብቻን፡የመፈጸምና፡ቤተሰብን፡የመመሥረት፡መብት፡አላቸው፤፡ጋብቻ፡በመፈጸም፡በጋብቻ፡ጊዜና፡ጋብቻ፡በሚፈርስበትም፡ጊዜ፡እኩል፡መብት፡አላቸው።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡ከጭቆና፡ሸሽቶ፡በሌሎች፡አገሮች፡ጥገኝነትን፡የመጠየቅና፡በደህና፡የመኖር፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡ከደረሰው፡ማንኛውም፡የሳይንስ፡የድርሰትና፡የኪነ፡ጥበብ፡ሥራ፡የሚያገኘው፡የሞራሉንና፡የሃብት፡ጥቅሞች፡እንዲከበሩለት፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am ማንም፡ሰው፡ቢሆን፡በባርነት፡አይገዛም።፡ባርነትና፡የባሪያ፡ንግድም፡በማንኛውም፡ዓይነት፡ክልክል፡ነው።
__label__am በሥራ፡ላይ፡ያለ፡ሰው፡ለእራሱና፡ለቤተሰቡ፡ለሰብዓዊ፡ክብር፡ተገቢ፡የሆነ፡ኑሮን፡የሚያስገኝለትና፡ካስፈለገም፡በሌሎች፡የኀብረሰብ፡ደህንነት፡መጠበቂያ፡ዘዴዎች፡የተደገፈ፡ትክክለኛና፡ተስማሚ፡ዋጋውን፡የማግኘት፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡ብቻውን፡ወይም፡ከሌሎች፡ጋር፡በኀብረት፡ሆኖ፡የኀብረት፡ባለቤትነት፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am ቤተሰብ፡በኀብረ፡ሰብ፡የተፈጥሮና፡መሰረታዊ፡ክፍል፡ስለሆነ፡በኀብረሰቡና፡በመንግሥቱም፡ደህንነቱ፡እንዲጠበቅለት፡ይገባል።
__label__am ማንም፡ሰው፡ያለፍርድ፡ዜግነቱ፡አይወሰድበትም፡ወይም፡ዜግነቱን፡የመለወጥ፡መብት፡አይነፈገውም።
__label__am ጋብቻ፡የሚፈጸመው፡ጋብቻ፡ለመፈጸም፡በሚፈልጉ፡ሁለቱም፡ወገኖች፡በሚያደርጉት፡ነጻና፡ሙሉ፡ስምምነት፡መሠረት፡ብቻ፡ነው።
__label__am በወንጀል፡ክስ፡የተከሰሰ፡ማንኛውም፡ሰው፡ለመከላከያው፡አስፈላጊዎች፡የሆኑትን፡ሁሉ፡አቅርቦ፡በሚከራከርበት፡የይፋ፡ፍርድ፡ቤት፡በሕግ፡መሠረት፡ወንጀለኛ፡መሆኑ፡እስቲረጋገጥበት፡ድረስ፡ከወንጀል፡ነጻ፡እንደሆነ፡የመቆጠር፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am ወላጆች፡ለልጆቻቸው፡ለመስጠት፡የሚፈልጉትን፡ትምህርት፡ለመምረጥ፡የቅድሚያ፡መብት፡አላችው።፡
__label__am እነዚህ፡መብቶችና፡ነፃነቶች፡በማንኛውም፡ሁኔታ፡የተባበሩት፡መንግሥታት፡ድርጅት፡መሰረት፡ዓላማዎች፡ተቃራኒ፡በሆነ፡መንገድ፡ሊፈጸሙ፡አይገባቸውም።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡ከማንኛውም፡አገር፡ሆነ፡ከራሱ፡አገር፡ወጥቶ፡እንደገና፡ወደ፡አገሩ፡የመመለስ፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am ፖለቲካዊ፡ካልሆኑ፡ወንጀሎች፡ወይም፡የተባበሩት፡መንግሥታት፡ድርጅት፡ዋና፡ዓላማዎችን፡ከሚቃረኑ፡ሥራዎች፡የተነሳ፡በሚደርሱ፡ክሶች፡ምክንያት፡ከሆነ፡ይህ፡መብት፡ሊያገለግል፡አይችልም።
__label__am የሰው፡ልጅ፡ሁሉ፡ሲወለድ፡ነጻና፡በክብርና፡በመብትም፡እኩልነት፡ያለው፡ነው።፡የተፈጥሮ፡ማስተዋልና፡ሕሊና፡ስላለው፡አንዱ፡ሌላውን፡በወንድማማችነት፡መንፈስ፡መመልከት፡ይገባዋል።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡ያላንዳች፡ልዩነት፡ማድረግ፡ለአንድ፡ዓይነት፡ሥራ፡እኩል፡የሆነ፡ደመወዝ፡የማግኘት፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am ማንም፡ሰው፡ቢሆን፡የጭካኔ፡ስቃይ፡እንዳይደርስበት፡ወይም፡ከሰብዓዊ፡አፈጻጸም፡ውጭ፡የሆነ፡የተዋረድ፡ተግባር፡ወይም፡ቅጣት፡አይፈጸምበትም።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡በኀብረ፡ሰቡ፡የባህል፡ኑሮ፡በነጻ፡መካፈልና፡በኪነ፡ጥበብ፡ለመጠቀም፡በሳይንስ፡እርምጃና፡በጥቅሞቹም፡ለመሳተፍ፡መብት፡አለው።፡
__label__am ማንም፡ሰው፡በብሔራዊ፡ወይም፡በኢንተርናሽናል፡ሕግ፡አንድ፡ነገር፡ወንጀል፡ሆኖ፡ባልተደነገገበት፡ጊዜ፡በፈጸመው፡ወይም፡ባልፈጸመው፡ማንኛውም፡ሥራ፡ወንጀለኛ፡ሆኖ፡አይከሰስም።፡ወይም፡ወንጀሉ፡በተፈጸመበት፡ጊዜ፡ከተደነገገው፡ቅጣት፡ይበልጥ፡አይፈረድበትም።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡በየብሔራዊ፡ወሰን፡ክልሉ፡የመዘዋወርና፡የመኖር፡ነጻነት፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡የዜግነት፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am በዩኔስኮ፡ተዘጋጅቶ፡በኢትዮጵያ፡ብሄራዊ፡ኮሚሽን፡ተተረጎመ
__label__am ማንም፡ሰው፡ያለፍርድ፡ንብረቱ፡አይወሰድበትም።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡በአገሩ፡የህዝብ፡አገልግሎት፡እኩል፡የማግኘት፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am ማንም፡ሰው፡የአንድ፡ማኀበር፡አባል፡እንዲሆን፡አይገደድም።
__label__am ማንም፡ሰው፡ያለፍርድ፡ተይዞ፡እንዲታሰር፡ወይም፡በግዛት፡እንዲኖር፡አይደረግም።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡በሰላም፡የመሰብሰብና፡ግንኙነት፡የማድረግ፡ነጻነት፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am በዚህ፡ውሳኔ፡ከላይ፡የተዘረዘረው፡ሁሉ፡በዚሁ፡ውስጥ፡የተጠቀሱትን፡ማናቸውም፡መብቶች፡ወይም፡ነጻነቶች፡ለማበላሸት፡በታሰበ፡ማንኛውም፡ዓይነት፡ተግባር፡ለማዋል፡ወይም፡ድርጊትን፡ለመፈጸም፡ለማንኛውም፡መንግሥት፡ወይም፡ድርጅት፡ወይም፡ሰው፡የተባሉ፡አይተረጎሙም።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡የሃሳብ፡የሕሊናና፡የሃይማኖት፡ነጻነት፡መብት፡አለው።፡ይህም፡መብት፡ሃይማኖቱን፡ወይም፡እምነቱን፡የመለወጥ፡ነጻነትንና፡ብቻውን፡ወይም፡ከሌሎች፡ጋር፡በኀብረት፡በይፋ፡ወይም፡በግል፡ሆኖ፡ሃይማኖቱን፡ወይም፡እምነቱን፡የማስተማር፣፡በተግባር፡የመግለጽ፡የማምለክና፡የማክበር፡ነጻነትን፡ይጨምራል።
__label__am ከዚህም፡በተቀረ፡አንድ፡ሰው፡ከሚኖርበት፡አገር፡ወይም፡ግዛት፡የፖለቲካ፡የአገዛዝ፡ወይም፡የኢንተርናሽናል፡አቋም፡የተነሳ፡አገሩ፡ነጻም፡ሆነ፡በሞግዚትነት፡አስተዳደር፡ወይም፡እራሱን፡ችሎ፡የማይተዳደር፡አገር፡ተወላጅ፡ቢሆንም፡በማንኛውም፡ዓይነት፡ገደብ፡ያለው፡አገዛዝ፡ሥር፡ቢሆንም፡ልዩነት፡አይፈጸምበትም።
__label__am ማንም፡ሰው፡በግል፡ኑሮው፡በቤተሰቡ፡ውስጥ፡በቤቱ፡ወይም፡በሚጻጻፈው፡ደብዳቤ፡በፍርድ፡ያልተለየ፡ጣልቃ፡ገብነት፡ወይም፡ክብሩን፡የሚነካና፡ስሙን፡የሚያጎድፍ፡ተቃውሞ፡አይፈጸምበትም።፡እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡ከእንደዚህ፡ያለ፡ጣልቃ፡ገብነት፡ወይም፡የሚጎዳ፡ተግባር፡ሕግ፡እንዲከላከልለት፡መብት፡አለው።፡
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡የዘር፡የቀለም፡የጾታ፡የቋንቋ፡የሃይማኖት፡የፖለቲካ፡ወይም፡የሌላ፡ዓይነት፡አስተሳሰብ፡የብሔራዊ፡ወይም፡የኀብረተሰብ፡ታሪክ፡የሀብት፡የትውልድ፡ወይም፡የሌላ፡ደረጃ፡ልዩነት፡ሳይኖሩ፡በዚሁ፡ውሳኔ፡የተዘረዘሩት፡መብቶችንና፡ነጻነቶች፡ሁሉ፡እንዲከበሩለት፡ይገባል።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡የመማር፡መብት፡አለው።፡ትምህርት፡ቢያንስ፡ቢያንስ፡በአንደኛ፡ደረጃና፡በመሰረታዊ፡ደረጃዎች፡በነጻ፡ሊሆን፡ይገባል።፡የአንደኛ፡ደረጃ፡ትምህርት፡መማር፡ግዴታ፡ነው።፡የቴክኒክና፡የልዩ፡ልዩ፡ሙያ፡ትምህርት፡በጠቅላላው፡የከፍተኛ፡ደረጃ፡ደግሞ፡በችሎታ፡መሠረት፡ለሁሉም፡እኩል፡መሰጠት፡አለበት።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡ለእራሱና፡ለቤተሰቡ፡ጤንነትና፡ደህንነት፡ምግብ፣፡ልብስ፣፡ቤትና፡ሕክምና፡አስፈላጊ፡የማኀበራዊ፡ኑሮ፡አገልግሎቶችም፡ጭምር፡የሚበቃ፡የኑሮ፡ደረጃ፡ለማግኘት፡መብት፡አለው።፡ሥራ፡ሳይቀጠር፡ቢቀር፡ቢታመም፡ለመሥራት፡ባይችል፡ባል፡ወይም፡ሚስት፡ቢሞት፡ቢያረጅ፡ወይም፡ከቁጥጥሩ፡ውጭ፡በሆኑ፡ምክንያቶች፡መሰናከል፡ቢገጥመው፡ደህንነቱ፡እንዲጠበቅለት፡መብት፡አለው።
__label__am እያንዳንዱ፡ሰው፡በመብቶቹ፡በነጻነቶቹ፡በሚጠቀምበት፡ጊዜ፡የሚታገደው፡የሌሎችን፡መብቶችና፡ነጻነቶች፡በሚገባ፡ለማሰከበር፡ብቻ፡በተደነገጉ፡ሕጎችና፡የግብረ፡ገብነትን፡የጠቅላላውን፡ሕዝብ፡ፀጥታና፡ደህንነት፡በዴሞክራቲክ፡ማኀበራዊ፡ኑሮ፡ትክክለኛ፡የሆነው፡ተፈላጊ፡ጉዳይ፡ለማርካት፡በተወሰነው፡ብቻ፡ነው።
__label__ka სან-ბარტოლომე-დე-კორნეხა () — მუნიციპალიტეტი ესპანეთში, შედის კასტილია და ლეონის ავტონომიური გაერთიანების ავილის პროვინციის ელ-ბარკო-დე-ავილა-პიედრახიტის კომარკის შემადგენლობაში. ფართობი — 7 კმ². მოსახლეობა — 38 კაცი (2022 წ.). იხილეთ აგრეთვე ავილის მუნიციპალიტეტები რესურსები ინტერნეტში სან-ბარტოლომე-დე-კორნეხის მუნიციპალიტეტის ოფიციალური საიტი სქოლიო ავილის მუნიციპალიტეტები
__label__ka Chupa Chups (ჩუპა ჩუპსი) — ესპანური კომპანია, რომელიც საწუწნ კანფეტებს ამზადებს. დაარსებულია 1958 წელს ენრიკე ბერნატომის მიერ. ლოგოს დიზაინი ეკუთვნის სალვადორ დალის. სქოლიო ესპანეთის კომპანიები 1958 წელს დაარსებული კომპანიები
__label__ka ნიკა დაუშვილი (დ. 17 ოქტომბერი, 1989) — ქართველი ფეხბურთელი, თბილისის „დინამოს“ მეკარე. ტიტულები უმაღლესი ლიგა ჩემპიონი (1): 2013/2014 საქართველოს თასის გამარჯვებული (1): 2013/2014 საქართველოს სუპერთასის გამარჯვებული (1): 2014/2015 რესურსები ინტერნეტში პროფილი Transfermarkt-ზე პროფილი Soccerway-ზე პროფილი დინამოს ოფიციალურ საიტზე სქოლიო დაბადებული 1989 ქართველი ფეხბურთელები ცხინვალის ფეხბურთელები ვიტ ჯორჯიას ფეხბურთელები თბილისის დინამოს ფეხბურთელები დაბადებული 17 ოქტომბერი
__label__ka ასტრეა () — ქალაქი და მუნიციპალიტეტი კოლუმბიაში, სესარის დეპარტამენტში. 2005 წლის მონაცემებით, მოსახლეობა 18.394 ადამიანს შეადგენდა. ფართობი 563.14 კმ²-ია. იხილეთ აგრეთვე სესარის დეპარტამენტი რესურსები ინტერნეტში statoids.com-ის მონაცემები კოლუმბიის სტატისტიკის ეროვნული დეპარტამენტის 2005 წლის მონაცემები სესარის დეპარტამენტის მუნიციპალიტეტები და ქალაქები
__label__ka გერი როსი (; დ. 3 ნოემბერი, 1956) — ამერიკელი კინორეჟისორი, სცენარისტი და პროდიუსერი. იგი ყველაზე მეტად ცნობილია ფილმებით: „პლეზენტსვილი“ (1998), „ფავორიტი“ (2003), „შიმშილის თამაშები“ (2012) და „ოუშენის რვა მეგობარი“ (2018). ის აგრეთვე არის ფილმების „დიდი“ (1988) და „დეივი (1993) სცენარის ავტორი. მიღებული აქვს ოსკარის ოთხი ნომინაცია. ფილმოგრაფია რესურსები ინტერნეტში სქოლიო დაბადებული 3 ნოემბერი დაბადებული 1956 ამერიკელი მამაკაცი სცენარისტები ამერიკელი პროდიუსერები ამერიკელი რეჟისორები პენსილვანიის უნივერსიტეტის კურსდამთავრებულები
__label__ka დავათის ეკლესია — არქიტექტურული ძეგლი, მდებარეობს დუშეთის მუნიციპალიტეტში, სოფელი დავათის სამხრეთ-დასავლეთით 0,5 კილომეტრზე. განეკუთვნება განვითარებულ შუა საუკუნეებს. ეკლესია დარბაზულია, ნაგებია ნატეხი ქვითა და შირიმის კვადრებით. სამხრეთი კედელი მთლიანად მთის ფერდობშია შეჭრილი. ჩრდილოეთ კედელში გაჭრილია ვიწრო და დაბალი კარი, რომლის წირთხლებში საურდულე ხვრელებია. აღმოსავლეთით ნახევარწრიული აფსიდის ღერძზე, თაღოვანი სარკმელია, მის ორივე მხარეს - თითო სწორკუთხა ნიში. აფსიდის იატაკი ერთი საფეხურითაა შემაღლებული და მოსწორებულია კირხსნარით. დარბაზს ცილინდრული კამარა ხურავს. კონქის თაღი ეყრდნობა აფსიდის მხრებზე შემდგარ შირიმის იმპოსტებს. ეკლესია შიგნით და გარეთ შელესილია, ფასადები სადაა. ლავგარდანი შედგენილია შირიმის ბრტყელი ფილებისაგან. სახურავი კრამიტისაა. ბრტყელ კრამიტებზე გამოსახულია რელიეფური რკალები და ბოლოებგაგანიერებული ტოლმკლავა ჯვრები. ლიტერატურა დუშეთის მუნიციპალიტეტის ტაძრები
__label__ka სებასტიან-ლეალი () — მუნიციპალიტეტი ბრაზილიაში, პიაუის შტატში; მდებარეობს ზღვის დონიდან 400 მეტრზე. მიეკუთვნება პიაუის სამხრეთ-აღმოსავლეთ მეზორეგიონს. შედის ეკონომიკურ-სტატისტიკურ მიკრორეგიონ ბერტოლინიის შემადგენლობაში. 2010 წლის მონაცემებით, მოსახლეობა 4 116 ადამიანს შეადგენდა, მოსახლეობის სიმჭიდროვე 1.31 კმ²-ზე. ფართობი 3 151 592 კმ²-ია. იხილეთ აგრეთვე პიაუი ბრაზილიის შტატები რესურსები ინტერნეტში ბრაზილიის სტატისტიკის ეროვნული ინსტიტუტი, 2010 წლის აღწერის მონაცემები Ranking decrescente do IDH-M dos municípios do Brasil პიაუის შტატის მუნიციპალიტეტები
__label__ka „მინდა, ვიღაც მელოდეს სადღაც“ (ფრანგ. Je voudrais que quelqu'un m'attende quelque part) — ფრანგი მწერლის ანა გავალდას ნოველების კრებული. კრებული დაჯილდოვდა ARIAL-ის გრანპრით. წიგნი გამოქვეყნებისთანავე (1999 წ) ბესტსელერად იქცა და 27 ენაზე ითარგმნა, მათ შორის ქართულად (2010 წ. „ბაკურ სულაკაურის გამომცემლობა“). რესურსები ინტერნეტში მინდა, ვიღაც მელოდეს სადღაც ანა გავალდას ნაწარმოებები 1999 წლის რომანები
__label__ka სიყვარული () — მიხაელ ჰანეკეს 2012 წლის დრამატული ფილმი. სიუჟეტი ანა და ჟორჟი 80 წელს გადაცილებული წყვილია. ისინი მუსიკის მასწავლებლები იყვნენ, თუმცა ახლა პენსიაზე არიან. მათი ქალიშვილი ევა საზღვარგარეთ ცხოვრობს. ანას ინსულტი ემართება. ჟორჟი ცდილობს, სახლში მოუაროს ცოლს და არ წაიყვანოს ის მოხუცთა თავშესაფარში. თუმცა ანას მდგომარეობა თანდათან უარესდება, ბოლოს მას საუბარიც უჭირს. ჟორჟი ბალიშით დაახრჩობს ანას და სახლიდან წავა. როლებში ჟან-ლუი ტრენტინიანი - ჟორჟი ემანუელ რივა - ანა იზაბელ იუპერი - ევა ალექსანდრ ტარო - ალექსანდრი ჯილდოები სეზარი საუკეთესო ფილმი საუკეთესო რეჟისორი: მიხაელ ჰანეკე საუკეთესო ორიგინალური სცენარი: მიხაელ ჰანეკე საუკეთესო მსახიობი კაცი: ჟან-ლუი ტრენტინიანი საუკეთესო მსახიობი ქალი: ემანუელ რივა ოსკარი საუკეთესო უცხოენოვანი ფილმი BAFTA საუკეთესო უცხოენოვანი ფილმი საუკეთესო მსახიობი ქალი: ემანუელ რივა ოქროს გლობუსი საუკეთესო უცხოენოვანი ფილმი კანის კინოფესტივალი ოქროს პალმის რტო რესურსები ინტერნეტში 2012 წლის ფილმები ფრანგული ფილმები ფრანგულენოვანი ფილმები დრამატული ფილმები მიხაელ ჰანეკეს ფილმები ოქროს პალმის რტოს მფლობელი ფილმები
__label__ka რიზა ქოჯაოღლუ (, დ. 1979) — თურქი მსახიობი. დაიბადა და გაიზარდა იზმირში. 2001 წლის შემდეგ მუშაობს კინოში. მონაწილეობა მიიღო 2016-2017 წლის თურქულ სერიალში „შიგნით“, დავუთის როლში. სქოლიო დაბადებული 1979 თურქი მსახიობები
__label__ka ძეგვის ეკლესია — ეკლესია მცხეთის მუნიციპალიტეტის სოფელ ძეგვში. მდებარეობს სოფლის სასაფლაოს აღმოსავლეთით, ბორცვზე. თარიღდება გვიანდელი ფეოდალური ხანით. ეკლესია დარბაზულია (4,34 X 3,28 მ), ნაგებია ნატეხი და რიყის ქვით. შესასვლელი ჩრდილოეთიდანაა. აღმოსავლეთის, დასავლეთის და ჩრდილოეთის კედლებში თითო სარკმელია. სამხრეთის, დასავლეთის და ნაწილობრივ აღმოსავლეთის ფასადები ბორცვის ფერდშია ჩამჯდარი. ლიტერატურა მცხეთის მუნიციპალიტეტის ტაძრები
__label__ka გრიგორეუკა () — სოფელი მოლდოვაში, სინჯერეის რაიონში. მდებარეობს ზღვის დონიდან 80 მეტრზე. 2004 წლის მონაცემებით, მოსახლეობა 1 538 ადამიანს შეადგენდა. იხილეთ აგრეთვე მოლდოვის ადმინისტრაციული დაყოფა სინჯერეის რაიონი რესურსები ინტერნეტში მოლდოვის მოსახლეობის 2004 წლის აღწერის მონაცემები სინჯერეის რაიონის სოფლები
__label__ka ზედა ღვარდია — სოფელი საქართველოში, რაჭა-ლეჩხუმისა და ქვემო სვანეთის მხარის ამბროლაურის მუნიციპალიტეტში (ცახის თემი), მდებარეობს რაჭის ქედის ჩრდილოეთ კალთაზე. მდინარე რიონის მარცხენა მხარეს. ზღვის დონიდან 700 მეტრი, ამბროლაურიდან 27 კილომეტრი. ზედა ღვარდია ძველად სოფელ ღვარდიის ნაწილი იყო, შემდეგ ცალკე გამოეყო. წყაროებში XVI საუკუნის II ნახევრიდან იხსენიება ზეღვარდიის სახელწოდებით. დემოგრაფია 2014 წლის აღწერის მონაცემებით სოფელში ცხოვრობს 42 ადამიანი. ლიტერატურა სქოლიო ამბროლაურის მუნიციპალიტეტის სოფლები
__label__ka ბოჭორმის კოშკი — კოშკი ახმეტის მუნიციპალიტეტში, თუშეთში, ნასოფლარ ბოჭორმის განაპირას, სამხრეთით. განეკუთვნება გვიანდელ შუა საუკუნეებს. იგი ოთხსართულიანია, გეგმით კვადრატული (5,2 X 5,2 მ); ნაგებია ფიქლის მშრალი წყობით. კოშკში შესასვლელი აღმოსავლეთიდან, II სართულის დონეზეა. კარი თაღოვანია. I სართულის სამხრეთ კედელში ერთი სარკმელია. დანარჩენი კედლები ყრუა. II სართულის სამხრეთ კედელში თაღოვანი სარკმელია გაჭრილი, დასავლეთ კედელში - ერთი სათოფურია. III სართულის აღმოსავლეთ და ჩრდილოეთ კედლებში ორ-ორი სათოფურია, დანარჩენ ორში - სამი. მეოთხე სართულის ოთხივე კედელში თითო მაშიკული ყოფილა მოწყობილი, რომელთაგანაც მხოლოდ მცირე ნაწილები შემორჩა. კოშკის სართულშუა გადახურვა ხის კოჭებზე ყოფილა გამართული, შემორჩენილია კოჭების საყრდენი ბუდეები. ლიტერატურა ახმეტის მუნიციპალიტეტის კოშკები
__label__ka მერენდოი, მერანდოი — ქართული აბორიგენული წითელყურძნიანი სასუფრე ვაზის ჯიში ჰერეთიდან. ჰერეთის ადგილობრივი წარმოშობის ჯიშია. ახასიათებს დიდი ზომის მტევნები და დიდი ზომის მარცვალი. სქელკანიანია, მოწითურო-მოშავო ელფერით. გამოიყენება სასუფრედ. ლიტერატურა უჯმაჯურიძე ლ., კაკაბაძე გ., მამასახლიშვილი ლ., „ქართული ვაზის ჯიშები“, თბ., 2018, გვ. 238 ჰერეთის ვაზის ჯიშები ვაზის წითელყურძნიანი სასუფრე ქართული ჯიშები
__label__ka ერეკლე II-ის ძეგლი თელავში — მერაბ მერაბიშვილის მიერ შექმნილი ქართლ-კახეთის მეფის, ერეკლე II-ის ცხენოსანი ძეგლი ქალაქ თელავში. ნამუშევარი ბრინჯაოსგანაა დამზადებული და პოსტმანის გარეშე 8,5 მეტრი სიმაღლისაა. ერეკლე მეფის ძეგლს, რომელიც 1971 წელს შეიქმნა, რესპუბლიკურ კონკურსზე მოპოვებული აქვს პირველი პრემია. დღესდღეობით თელავში არსებული მერაბ მერაბიშვილის ეს ნამუშევარი ქალაქის ერთ-ერთ სიმბოლოს წარმოადგენს. გალერეა რესურსები ინტერნეტში მერაბ მერაბიშვილი კახეთის მხარის ძეგლები
__label__ka Geffen Records — ამერიკული მუსიკალური ლეიბლი. დაარსდა 1980 წელს. ლეიბლთან თანამშრომლობს ან თანამშრომლობდა მრავალი შემსრულებელი, რომელთა შორის არიან: 10,000 Maniacs, Aerosmith, Blink-182, The Cure, Eagles, Guns N' Roses, ელტონ ჯონი, ბიბი კინგი, Limp Bizkit, ჯონ ლენონი, იოკო ონო, Siouxsie and the Banshees, რუფუს უეინრაიტი და სხვები. რესურსები ინტერნეტში აშშ-ის ლეიბლები Universal Music Group
__label__ka იგუარასი () — მუნიციპალიტეტი ბრაზილიაში, პერნამბუკუს შტატში; მდებარეობს ზღვის დონიდან 571 მეტრზე. მიეკუთვნება სერტან-პერნამბუკანუს მეზორეგიონს. შედის ეკონომიკურ-სტატისტიკურ მიკრორეგიონ პაჟეუს შემადგენლობაში. 2010 წლის მონაცემებით, მოსახლეობა 11 779 ადამიანს შეადგენდა, მოსახლეობის სიმჭიდროვე 14.05 კმ²-ზე. ფართობი 838 132 კმ²-ია. იხილეთ აგრეთვე პერნამბუკუ ბრაზილიის შტატები რესურსები ინტერნეტში ბრაზილიის სტატისტიკის ეროვნული ინსტიტუტი, 2010 წლის აღწერის მონაცემები Ranking decrescente do IDH-M dos municípios do Brasil პერნამბუკუს შტატის მუნიციპალიტეტები
__label__ka იულიუს II (, ერისკაცობაში ჯულიანო დელა როვერე; დ. 5 დეკემბერი, 1443 — გ. 21 თებერვალი, 1513) — რომის პაპი 1503 წლის 1 ნოემბრიდან 1513 წლის 21 თებერვლამდე. ჯულიანო დელა როვერე დაიბადა დეკემბერს ალბისოლეში. პაპად არჩევისას იმპერატორ იულიუს კეისარის პატივსაცემად მიიღო სახელწოდება იულიუს II. იყო ხელოვნების დიდი მეცენატი. დონატო ბრამანტეს გეგმის მიხედვით ააგო წმინდა პეტრეს ახალი ტაძარი. რესურსები ინტერნეტში Luminarium: Pope Julius II Pope Julius II at Find-A-Grave "Julius Excluded from Heaven" (1514) Satire attributed to Desiderius Erasmus. რომის პაპები დაბადებული 5 დეკემბერი დაბადებული 1443 გარდაცვლილი 21 თებერვალი გარდაცვლილი 1513
__label__ka მოვლენები გაიმართა ეგრისის სახალხო კრება. მიწისძვრამ ლატაკია გაანადგურა. ნან ლიანის დინასტია დაიწყო; პირველი მმართველი ნან ლიან ჟუან დი იყო. ჩინური ლიანის დინასტია: ლიან იუან დი შეცვალა ლიან ჟენ იან ჰუმ, შემდეგ ლიან ძინ დიმ. დაიბადნენ იანვარი თებერვალი მარტი აპრილი მაისი ივნისი ივლისი აგვისტო სექტემბერი ოქტომბერი ნოემბერი დეკემბერი თარიღი უცნობია გარდაიცვალნენ იანვარი თებერვალი მარტი აპრილი მაისი ივნისი 7 ივნისი:ვიგილიუსი — რომის პაპი (დ. უცნობია) ივლისი აგვისტო სექტემბერი ოქტომბერი ნოემბერი დეკემბერი თარიღი უცნობია თოიდებალდი — ფრანკთა მეფე (დ. 535) მერმეროე — VI საუკუნის სასანიდური სპარსეთის სარდალი
__label__ka პუერტო-ვილჩესი () — ქალაქი და მუნიციპალიტეტი კოლუმბიაში, სანტანდერის დეპარტამენტში. მდებარეობს ზღვის დონიდან 27 მეტრზე. 2005 წლის მონაცემებით, მოსახლეობა 31 058 ადამიანს შეადგენდა, სიმჭიდროვე 19.56 ადამიანი კმ²-ზე. ფართობი 1 588 კმ²-ია. იხილეთ აგრეთვე კოლუმბიის ქალაქების სია რესურსები ინტერნეტში კოლუმბიის მოსახლეობის 2005 წლის აღწერის მონაცემები — კოლუმბიის სტატისტიკის ეროვნული დეპარტამენტი statoids.com-ის მონაცემები სანტანდერის დეპარტამენტის მუნიციპალიტეტები და ქალაქები
__label__ka მოვლენები დაიბადნენ იანვარი თებერვალი მარტი აპრილი მაისი ივნისი ივლისი აგვისტო სექტემბერი ოქტომბერი ნოემბერი დეკემბერი გარდაიცვალნენ იანვარი თებერვალი მარტი აპრილი მაისი ივნისი ივლისი აგვისტო სექტემბერი ოქტომბერი ნოემბერი დეკემბერი
__label__ka გაზი-იურტი (, ; 1944–1958 წლებში — ზარეჩნოე) — სოფელი რუსეთში, ინგუშეთის რესპუბლიკის ნაზრანის რაიონში. მუნიციპალურ წარმონაქმნ „გაზი-იურტის სასოფლო დასახლების“ ცენტრი და ერთადერთი დასახლებული პუნქტი. მდებარეობს მდინარე სუნჯის (თერგის მარჯვენა შენაკადი) მარჯვენა ნაპირზე, ნაზრანიდან ჩრდილო-აღმოსავლეთით 1,5 კმ-ში, მაგასიდან ჩრდილოეთით 9 კმ-ში, ზღვის დონიდან 501 მ. 1953 მცხოვრები (2019). სქოლიო ნაზრანის რაიონის სოფლები
__label__ka მიხეილ სვიმონიშვილი (დ. 1977, თბილისი) — ქართველი მეწარმე და პოლიტიკოსი. განათლება 1993 წელს დაამთავრა თბილისის მე-6 საშუალო სკოლა. სწავლობდა თბილისის სახელმწიფო უნივერსიტეტში, გერმანიის ქალაქ ბრუხზალის უმაღლეს ტექნიკურ სასწავლებელში, შვეიცარიაში, ციურიხის უნივერსიტეტში. მიღებული აქვს ასევე მუსიკალური განათლება და არის ფოლკლორული ანსამბლ „გეორგიკას“ წევრი. საჯარო სამსახური 2004-2008 წლებში მუშაობდა საჯარო სამსახურში, 2004 წელს მცირე ხნის მანძილზე იყო თბილისის მერიის ქალაქგეგმარებისა და სივრცითი მოწყობის სამსახურის უფროსი. იმავე წელს დაინიშნა სოფლის მეურნეობის მინისტრად, 2006-2008 წლებში იყო სახელმწიფო რწმუნებული გურიის მხარეში. ბიზნესი 2008 წლიდან კვლავ ბიზნესში მოღვაწეობს. ხელმძღვანელობს კომპანია შ.პ.ს. „წყალი მარგებელს“, რომელიც 1997 წელს შვეიცარეილ პარტნიორებთან ერთად დააფუძნა და აწარმოებს მინერალური წყალ - ნაბეღლავს და სუფრის წყალ „ბახმაროს“. რესურსები ინტერნეტში საქართველოში ბიზნესის წარმოება შეიძლება სქოლიო ქართველი მეწარმეები საქართველოს სოფლის მეურნეობის მინისტრები დაბადებული 1977 თბილისში დაბადებულები
__label__ka თაგვისარა, პონტოური თაგვისარა () — ყვავილოვანი მცენარე სატაცურისებრთა ოჯახისა. დაბალი ბუჩქია, სიმაღლეში 30–50 სმ. აქვს მორიგეობით განლაგებული ტოტები. მცირე ზომის — 1–3 სმ სიგრძის კლადოდიუმები, ხეშეში, ტყავისებური, ლეგა, მუქი მწვანე, ლანცეტა, გრძლად წაწვეტებული და წვრილი ეკლით დაბოლოებული. მისი მთავარი ძარღვი კარგად გამოხატულია. ყვავილი — 1–2, სხედან კლადოდიუმების ქვედა მხარეზე. ყვავის და ნაყოფმსხმოიარობს თებერვალ-აპრილში. გავრცელებულია კავკასიასა და სამხრეთ ევროპაში. საქართველოში გვხვდება დასავლეთში (აფხაზეთი, სამეგრელო, იმერეთი), კახეთსა და შიდა ქართლში. იზრდება მთის ქვედა სარტყელში, სადაც ქმნის რაყებს, აგრეთვე შედის მარადმწვანე ქვეტყის შემადგენლობაში. სქოლიო თაგვისარა
__label__ka ვალ-დე-სან-მარტინი (, ) — მუნიციპალიტეტი ესპანეთში, შედის არაგონის ავტონომიური გაერთიანების სარაგოსის პროვინციის კამპო-დე-დაროკის კომარკის შემადგენლობაში. ფართობი — 25,657212 კმ². მოსახლეობა — 61 კაცი (2020 წ.). იხილეთ აგრეთვე სარაგოსის მუნიციპალიტეტები რესურსები ინტერნეტში Gran Enciclopedia Aragonesa - ვალ-დე-სან-მარტინი სქოლიო სარაგოსის მუნიციპალიტეტები
__label__ka უთნაფიშთიმი ან უთანაფიშთი (, ბაბილ. „სიცოცხლის მპოვნელი“) — წარღვნის გმირი, უბარა — თუთუს ძე. გილგამეშის ეპოსის პერსონაჟი, რომლის თავგადასავალი მოთხრობილია ეპოსის XI დაფაში. უთნაფიშთიმი თავად მოუთხრობს გილგამეშს წარღვნის ამბავს. როცა ღმერთებმა ქვეყნიერების წარღვნით წარხოცა განიზრახეს, მათ შორის ერთმა, კაცთა მოდგმისადმი კეთილად განწყობილმა ეამ, ევფრატის ნაპირას გაშენებულ ძველ ქალაქ შურუფაქში მცხოვრებს, თავის რჩეულს, უთნაფიშთიმს, ღმერთების ეს საიდუმლო გაუმხილა. გამოეცხადა სიზმარში და მოუწოდა: „ჰოი, კაცო, შურუფაქელო, უბარათუთუს ნაშიერო! სახლი დაანგრიე, ხომალდი ააგე! განაგდე დოვლათი, სიცოცხლე იხსენი! ყოველი სულდგმული, რაც არის, ხომალდზე აიყვანე“. ღმერთმა ისიც გამოუცხადა მას, თუ როგორი უნდა ყოფილიყო ხომალდი. გემის დიზაინი სავარაუდოდ ადგილზევე შეიქმნა ეას მიერ, ხოლო კიდობნის ჩარჩო, რომელიც ხუთ დღეში გაკეთდა, სიგრძეში, სიგანეში და სიმაღლეში იყო 200 ფუტი. ლიტერატურა ტონია, ნანა, მითოლოგიური ენციკლოპედია: ყმაწვილთათვის / ავტ.: ნანა ტონია, ზურაბ კიკნაძე, მთ. რედ.: რუსუდან მოსიძე, თბ.: ბონდო მაცაბერიძის გამ-ბა, 2003. სქოლიო ძველი შუამდინარეთის მითოლოგია შუმერული მითოლოგია გილგამეშის ეპოსი
__label__ka მოვლენები დაიბადნენ იანვარი თებერვალი მარტი აპრილი მაისი ივნისი ივლისი აგვისტო სექტემბერი ოქტომბერი ნოემბერი დეკემბერი თარიღი უცნობია არნულფ კარინტიელი — საღვთო რომის იმპერატორი. (გ. 899) ალ-ისტახრი — არაბი მოგზაური და გეოგრაფი. (გ. 934) გერულფ II — ჰოლანდიელი გრაფი (გ. 896) გარდაიცვალნენ იანვარი თებერვალი მარტი აპრილი მაისი ივნისი ივლისი აგვისტო სექტემბერი ოქტომბერი ნოემბერი დეკემბერი თარიღი უცნობია ლი გუნძო —ჩინელი მწერალი (დ. 770) რამირო I — ასტურიის მეფე (დ. 790) წმინდა პავლე აღმსარებელი — მართლმადიდებელი ეკლესიის წმინდანი ჯაიავარმან II — ქხმერების იმპერიის მეფე (დ. დაახლ. 770)
__label__ka კარინიენა (, ) — მუნიციპალიტეტი ესპანეთში, შედის არაგონის ავტონომიური გაერთიანების სარაგოსის პროვინციის კამპო-დე-კარინიენის კომარკის შემადგენლობაში. ფართობი — 82,509136 კმ². მოსახლეობა — 3355 კაცი (2020 წ.). იხილეთ აგრეთვე სარაგოსის მუნიციპალიტეტები რესურსები ინტერნეტში კარინიენის მუნიციპალიტეტის ოფიციალური საიტი Gran Enciclopedia Aragonesa - კარინიენა სქოლიო სარაგოსის მუნიციპალიტეტები
__label__ka საფოსტო ბარათი, ან ღია ბარათი — როგორც წესი, მართკუთხა სქელი მუყაოს ქაღალდი, რომელიც გამოიყენება წერილისთვის უკონვერტოდ გასაგზავნად. ხელოვნების სამყაროში საფოსტო ბარათი ხელოვნების ნიმუშად შეიძლება იყოს აღქმული; ამ სახის ხელოვნებას საფოსტო ხელოვნება (mail art) ეწოდება. საფოსტო ღია ბარათების შეგროვებასა და შესწავლას დელტოლოგიას უწოდებენ. რესურსები ინტერნეტში საფოსტო ბარათების ტრეიდერების ასოციაცია საფოსტო ბარათების კოლექცია . ფოსტა
__label__ka ოსკარის 71-ე დაჯილდოების ცერემონია — საუკეთესო ფილმებისა და კინოხელოვანების რიგით 71-ე დაჯილდოება კინემატოგრაფიულ ხელოვნებათა და მეცნიერებათა აკადემიის პრემიით. ცერემონია გაიმართა 1999 წლის 21 მარტს დოროთი ჩენდლერის აუდიტორიაში ლოს-ანჯელესი, კალიფორნია და მასში მონაწილეობა მიიღეს 1998 წელს გამოსულმა ფილმებმა. ოსკარის დაჯილდოებას აშშ-ში გადასცემდა ABC. დაჯილდოების ტრიუმფატორი გახდა ფილმი „შეყვარებული შექსპირი“. ლაურეატები რესურსები ინტერნეტში Academy Awards Official Web Site ოსკარის დაჯილდოების ცერემონიები
__label__ka 2019 წლის მონაცემებით საფრანგეთში 43 იუნესკოს მსოფლიო კულტურული მემკვიდრეობის ძეგლია. სტატისტიკა იუნესკოს მსოფლიო კულტურული მემკვიდრეობის ძეგლების სიაში მსოფლიოს მასშტაბით 1007 ძეგლია შეტანილი, მათ შორის 4,1 % საფრანგეთის ძეგლებია. მათ შორის: 39 კულტურული ობიექტი 3 ბუნების ძეგლი 1 შერეული ტიპის ობიექტი 18 კულტურული ობიექტი ადამიანური გენიის შედევრია (კრიტერიუმი i) და 2 ობიექტი — ბუნებრივი ფენომენალური, განსაკუთრებული სილამაზით და ესთეტიკური მნიშვნელობებით გამოირჩევა (კრიტერიუმი vii). ცხრილი ცხრილში შეტანილია ძეგლები, იუნესკოს მიერ მსოფლიო კულტურული მემკვიდრეობის სიაში დამატების თარიღის მიხედვით. იხილეთ აგრეთვე მსოფლიო მემკვიდრეობა იუნესკო რესურსები ინტერნეტში იუნესკოს ოფიციალური საიტი. კულტურული მემკვიდრეობის ძეგლები საფრანგეთში კულტურული მემკვიდრეობის ძეგლები საფრანგეთში
__label__ka ირაკლი შავაძე (დ. 28 თებერვალი, 1996, ბათუმი) — ქართველი სპორტსმენი (ბერძნულ-რომაული ჭიდაობა), საქართველოს ჩემპიონატის ვერცხლის პრიზიორი (2016, 59 კგ), ჭაბუკებს (2012, 50 კგ) და ახალგაზრდებს (2015, 55 კგ) შორის ევროპის ჩემპიონი და აგრეთვე ახალგაზრდებს შორის ევროპის ჩემპიონატის ვერცხლის პრიზიორი (2013, 50 კგ). ძირითადი შედეგები რესურსები ინტერნეტში ირაკლი შავაძე — ქართული სპორტი დაბადებული 28 თებერვალი დაბადებული 1996 ბათუმში დაბადებულები ქართველი მოჭიდავეები ბერძნულ-რომაულ სახეობაში
__label__ka ზესხოს ქედი — კავკასიონის მთავარი წყალგამყოფი ქედის სამხრეთ-დასავლეთი მიმართულების განშტოება, მდინარეების ცხენისწყლისა და ზესხოს წყალგამყოფი. სიგრძე 15 კმ, მაქსიმალური სიგანე 6 კმ, საშუალო სიმაღლე 2845 მ. აგებულია იურული თიხაფიქლებით, ქვიშაქვებითა და კირქვებით. ქედზე ორი პატარა მყინვარია. კალთებზე ხშირია მეოთხეული გამყინვარების ნიშნები — ცირკები, ტროგები და მორენები. ზესხოს ქედის კალთების ქვემო და შუა ნაწილები შემოსილია ფართოფოთლოვანი ტყით (მუხა, რცხილი, წიფელი), ზემო — ნაძვნარ-სოჭნარით. უფრო მაღლა სუბალპური და ალპური მდელოებია. ლიტერატურა სამეგრელო-ზემო სვანეთის მხარის ქედები
__label__ka ფრენკ მარშალი (; დ. 13 სექტემბერი, 1946) — ამერიკელი კინოპროდიუსერი და რეჟისორი, რომელიც ხშირად თანამშრომლობს მის მეუღლესთან კეთლინ კენედისთან. 1981 წელს კენედისა და სტივენ სპილბერგთან ერთად დააფუძნა კომპანია Amblin Entertainment. 1992 წელს მეუღლესთან ერთად დააფუძნა კომპანია The Kennedy/Marshall Company — კინომწარმოებელი კომპანია. მარშალი თანამშრომლობს სტივენ სპილბერგთან, პიტერ ბოგდანოვიჩსა და პოლ გრინგრასთან. მიღებული აქვს ოსკარის ხუთი ნომინაცია. რესურსები ინტერნეტში დაბადებული 13 სექტემბერი დაბადებული 1946 ამერიკელი კინოპროდიუსერები ამერიკელი რეჟისორები
__label__ka შიაულიაის მაზრა (ლიეტუვ. Šiaulių apskritis) — მაზრა ლიეტუვის ჩრდილოეთში, უკავია ჟემაიტიისა და აუქშტაიტიის ეთნოგრაფიული რეგიონების ნაწილი. ესაზღვრება ლატვიას, ასევე ტელშიაის, ტაუგარის, კაუნასის და პანევეჟის მაზრებს. შექმნილია 1994 წლის 19 ივლისს მიღებული ლიეტუვის რესპუბლიკის კანონით ტერიტორიულ-ადმინისტრაციული ერთეულების შესახებ. ადმინისტრაციული დაყოფა ქალაქ შიაულიაის თვითმმართველობა შიაულიაის რაიონის თვითმმართველობა (10 მამასახლისი) აკმიანის რაიონის თვითმმართველობა (6 მამასახლისი) იონიშკის რაიონის თვითმმართველობა (10 მამასახლისი) კელმენის რაიონის თვითმმართველობა (11 მამასახლისი) პაკრუის რაიონის თვითმმართველობა (8 მამასახლისი) რადვილიშკის რაიონის თვითმმართველობა (14 მამასახლისი) რესურსები ინტერნეტში ოფიციალური საიტი სქოლიო ლიეტუვის მაზრები
__label__ka ქარქიაანთ ეკლესია — არქიტექტურული ძეგლი, საკულტო ნაგებობა ერედვის მუნიციპალიტეტის ცხინვალის რეგიონში, სოფელი ჭარებიდან აღმოსავლეთით 5-6 კმ-ზე, ადგილი „მერია“. აგებულია შუასაუკუნეებში. დარბაზული ეკლესია ნაგებია სხვადასხვა ზომის ფლეთილი ქვით. გეგმით სწორკუთხა, აღმოსავლეთით ნახევარწრიული აბსიდით სრულდება. გრძივ კედლებზე შემორჩენილია პილასტრები. შესასვლელი სამხრეთიდან და დასავლეთიდანაა. ამათგან სამხრეთისა - ნაოთხალია. კედლების სიმაღლე 4 მეტრს აღწევს, ზოგან უფრო ნაკლებია. მიწის დონე ძლიერ აწეულია. ეკლესიის სამხრეთით სწორკუთხა გეგმის გაურკვეველი დანიშნულების ნაგებობათა ნანგრევებია. ასეთივე ნანგრევია მიჯრილი ჩრდილო-აღმოსავლეთ კუთხეზე. ტერიტორია სავსეა ჩამონაშალი ქვით.ძეგლი ძლიერ დაზიანებულია. ლიტერატურა შიდა, ქართლი, პატარა და დიდი ლიხვის ხეობების არქიტექტურული მემკვიდრეობა, ტ. I, თბ., 2002, გვ. 244-245 ერედვის მუნიციპალიტეტის ტაძრები
__label__ka ფლეიტა — სასულე მუსიკალური საკრავი. არსებობს განივი (დაკვრისას უჭირავთ ჰორიზონტალურად) და გასწვრივი ანუ სიგრძივი (იჭერენ ვერტიკალურად) ფლეიტები. გავრცელებულია უძველესი დროიდან, აღსანიშნავია, რომ ფლეიტა ამ დროისთვის უძველესი მუსიკალური საკრავია მსოფლიოში. გერმანიაში აღმოჩნდა 35,000 წლის წინ ძვლისგან გამოთლილი ფლეიტა. თანამედროვე ფლეიტა განივი ტიპისაა; აქვს ცალი მხრიდან დახურული ცილინდრული ლულა. ლულის ზედა ნაწილი წარმოადგენს საკრავის თავს, შუა ნაწილში განლაგებულია მოძრავი საცობი (წყობის რეგულირებისთვის), ჰაერის ჩასაბერი ხვრელი და ყველა ძირითადი სარქველი; ლულის ქვედა ნაწილში მოთავსებულია 3—4 სარქველი. საკრავი მზადდება სპეციალური ჯიშის ხისგან, ლითონისა და პლასტმასისაგან. დიაპაზონი — მცირე ოქტავის სი, ან პირველი ოქტავის დო — IV ოქტავის დო-მდე. ფლეიტის ნოტები იწერება ვიოლინოს გასაღებში. ფლეიტა საორკესტრო, საანსამბლო და სოლო საკრავია. ნაირსახეობებია: მცირე ფლეიტა (ფლეიტა პიკოლო), ალტის ფლეიტა და ბანის ფლეიტა. ლიტერატურა რესურსები ინტერნეტში ნანა მაჭარაშვილი, ხელოვნების ენციკლოპედიური ლექსიკონი, გამომცემლობა „მერედიანი“, თბ. 2004. სპებ-ის მასალები. ფლეიტა, უცხო სტყვათა ლექსიკონი . სქოლიო მუსიკალური საკრავები
__label__ka What's My Name? — რეპერ Pappa Bear-ის 1998 წლის სადებიუტო სტუდიური ალბომი. ეს არის მისი პირველი და ერთადერთი დისკი. ალბომი გამოსცა ლეიბლმა Universal. ალბომიდან გამოიცა სინგლები „Cherish“ (Kool & The Gang-ის სიმღერის ქავერ-ვერსია), Honey Luv და When The Rain Begins To Fall (ჯერმეინ ჯექსონისა და პია ზადორას სიმღერის ვერსია). სიმღერების სია Honey Luv - 3:57 D.I.S.C.O. - 4:57 Brothahood - 4:23 Hip Hop You Don't Stop - 4:12 Like This - 3:24 When The Rain Begins To Fall - 4:04 What's My Name - 4:01 I Like - 4:57 Xtra Large - 4:08 No Matta - 3:24 Throw Ya Hands RMX - 3:48 Are U With Me - 3:54 Cherish - 3:55 Throw Ya Hands - 3:29 I Thank U - 3:53 სქოლიო რესურსები ინტერნეტში ინფორმაცია საიტზე Discogs 1998 წლის სადებიუტო ალბომები Universal Music Group-ის ალბომები ჰიპ-ჰოპ ალბომები
__label__ka ბლაგოევგრადის თემი () — თემი ბულგარეთში. შედის ბლაგოევგრადის ოლქის შემადგენლობაში. 2008 წლის 15 მაისის მონაცემებით აქ ცხოვრობს 83 021 ადამიანი. ბლაგოევგრადის მერია — კონსტადი პასკალევი (ბულგარეთის სოციალისტური პარტია). დასახლებული პუნქტები ბლაგოევგრადის თემის დასახლებული პუნქტები: ბელო-პოლე ბისტრიცა ბლაგოევგრადი ბუჩინო ბოლგარჩევო გაბროვო გორნო-ხირსოვა დებოჩიცა დელვინი დრენკოვო დიბრავა ელენოვო ზელენდოლი იზგრევი კლისურა ლეშკო ლისია ლოროდაჟი მარულევო მოშტენეცი ობელი პადეში პოკროვნიკი რილცი სალიშტე ცეროვო ბლაგოევგრადის ოლქის თემები ბულგარეთის თემები
__label__ka პარედეს-დე-ესკალონა () — მუნიციპალიტეტი ესპანეთში, შედის კასტილია-ლა-მანჩის ავტონომიური გაერთიანების ტოლედოს პროვინციის ტორიხოსის კომარკის შემადგენლობაში. ფართობი — 25 კმ². მოსახლეობა — 112 კაცი (2020 წ.). იხილეთ აგრეთვე ტოლედოს მუნიციპალიტეტები რესურსები ინტერნეტში პარედეს-დე-ესკალონის მუნიციპალიტეტის ოფიციალური საიტი სქოლიო ტოლედოს მუნიციპალიტეტები
__label__ka ლიპერი (; ) — მუნიციპალიტეტი იოენსუუს ქვერეგიონში, ფინეთში. 2023 წლის აღწერის მიხედვით, მუნიციპალიტეტის მოსახლეობა 11 976 ადამიანს შეადგენს. მუნიციპალიტეტის ფართობი 1 161.23 კმ²-ია. მოსახლეობის სიმჭიდროვე 16.48 ადამიანია 1 კმ²-ზე. მუნიციპალიტეტის ერთადერთი ოფიციალური ენაა ფინური ენა. მეზობელი მუნიციპალიტეტებია: ჰეინიავესი, იოენსუუ, კონტიოლაჰტი, ოუტოკუმპუ, პოლვიიარვი, პიუჰიასელკია, რიაიაკიულია და სავონლინა. რესურსები ინტერნეტში Municipality of Liperi – Official website Liperi gymnasium სქოლიო ჩრდილოეთ კარელიის მუნიციპალიტეტები
__label__ka მოვლენები 29 სექტემბერი : რუდოლფ I არჩეულ იქნა გერმანიის მეფედ. ბოჰემიის მეფე ოტაკარ II-მ ქ. ბრატისლავა აიღო. დაიბადნენ იანვარი თებერვალი მარტი აპრილი მაისი ივნისი ივლისი აგვისტო სექტემბერი ოქტომბერი ნოემბერი დეკემბერი თარიღი უცნობია აბუ ალ-ფიდა — არაბი ისტორიკოსი, გეოგრაფი (გ. 1331) გარდაიცვალნენ იანვარი თებერვალი მარტი აპრილი მაისი ივნისი ივლისი აგვისტო სექტემბერი ოქტომბერი ნოემბერი დეკემბერი თარიღი უცნობია ლუკა იერუსალიმელი — იერუსალიმის ჯვრის ქართული მონასტრის წინამძღვარი სუმბატ ლიპარიტის ძე ორბელი — საქართველოს პოლიტიკური მოღვაწე
__label__ka იბიარა () — მუნიციპალიტეტი ბრაზილიაში, პარაიბის შტატში; მდებარეობს ზღვის დონიდან 341 მეტრზე. მიეკუთვნება სერტან-პარაიბის მეზორეგიონს. შედის ეკონომიკურ-სტატისტიკურ მიკრორეგიონ იტაპორანგის შემადგენლობაში. 2010 წლის მონაცემებით, მოსახლეობა 6 031 ადამიანს შეადგენდა, მოსახლეობის სიმჭიდროვე 24.67 კმ²-ზე. ფართობი 244 485 კმ²-ია. იხილეთ აგრეთვე პარაიბა ბრაზილიის შტატები რესურსები ინტერნეტში ბრაზილიის სტატისტიკის ეროვნული ინსტიტუტი, 2010 წლის აღწერის მონაცემები პარაიბის შტატის მუნიციპალიტეტები
__label__ka იბროსი () — მუნიციპალიტეტი ესპანეთში, შედის ანდალუსიის ავტონომიური გაერთიანების ხაენის პროვინციის ლა-ლომის კომარკის შემადგენლობაში. ფართობი — 55,74 კმ². მოსახლეობა — 3009 კაცი (2020 წ.). იხილეთ აგრეთვე ხაენის მუნიციპალიტეტები რესურსები ინტერნეტში იბროსის მუნიციპალიტეტის ოფიციალური საიტი სქოლიო ხაენის მუნიციპალიტეტები
__label__ka ასი (; ) — სოფელი რუსეთის ფედერაციაში, ბაშკირეთის რესპუბლიკის არხანგელის რაიონში. 2010 წლის მონაცემებით სოფელში ცხოვრობს 32 ადამიანი. რაიონულ ცენტრ არხანგელსკოედან დაშორებულია 15 კილომეტრით. უხლოესი რკინიგზის სადგურია პრიურალიე, რომელიც დაშორებულია 26 კმ-ით. რესურსები ინტერნეტში Совет муниципальных образований Республики Башкортостан. Асы на портале «Генеалогия и Архивы» არხანგელის რაიონის სოფლები
__label__ka მეგანთროპი (Meganthropus) (მეგა... და ბერძნ. anthropos — ადამიანი), ადამიანისმაგვარი პრიმატების წარმომადგენელი. მისი ნაშთები ცნობილია სამხრეთ აფრიკის ზედაპლიოცენური ნალექებიდან. ზოგიერთი მეცნიერი მეგანთროპს პითეკანთროპებს აკუთვნება, ზოგი ავსტრალოპითეკებს. საქართველოში, გარეჯის უდაბნოს გვიანმიოცენურ ნალექებში, ნაპოვნია მისი მონათესავე ფორმა — უდაბნოპითეკი. ლიტერატურა მჭედლიძე გ., ქსე, ტ. 6, გვ. 535, თბ., 1983 ჰომინიდები
__label__ka საკუთარი სახელი მენაღარიშვილი შეიძლება აღნიშნავდეს ერთ-ერთ შემდეგ პიროვნებათაგანს: ათინოგენ მენაღარიშვილი — აგროქიმიკოსი ირაკლი მენაღარიშვილი — პოლიტიკოსი მაია მენაღარიშვილი — პოლიტიკოსი ქართული გვარები
__label__ka მუკამბუ () — მუნიციპალიტეტი ბრაზილიაში, სეარის შტატში. მდებარეობს ქვეყნის ჩრდილო-აღმოსავლეთ რეგიონში. მიეკუთვნება სეარის შტატის ჩრდილო-დასავლეთ მეზორეგიონს. 2010 წლის მონაცემებით, მოსახლეობა 14 102 ადამიანს შეადგენდა. ფართობი 190.538 კმ²-ია. მოსახლეობის სიმჭიდროვე 74.01 კმ²-ზე. რესურსები ინტერნეტში ბრაზილიის გეოგრაფიისა და სტატისტიკის ინსტიტუტი , მოსახლეობის აღწერის მონაცემები სეარის შტატის მუნიციპალიტეტები
__label__ka ასფურცელა () — მრავალწლოვანი ბალახების ან ნახევრად ბუჩქების გვარი რთულყვავილოვანთა ოჯახისა. აქვთ მორიგეობით განლაგებული ფრთისებრი ფოთლები; მილისებრი ყვავილებისაგან შემდგარი კალათები ქმნიან ფარისებრ ყვავილედს. გვხვდება აღმოსავლეთ ნახევარსფეროს ზომიერ სარტყელში. საქართველოში გავრცელებულია მთიულეთის, მესხეთ-ჯავახეთის ველებზე, მშრალსა და ქვიან ფერდობებზე იზრდება ორი სახეობა — Tanacetum abrotanifolium და Tanacetum vulgare, რომლის მიწისზედა ნაწილები შეიცავს მთრიმლავ ნივთიერებებს, ეთეროვან ზეთებსა და ფისს. გამხმარი ყვავილებისაგან ამზადებენ ინსექტიციდებს. ლიტერატურა
__label__ka მენელაე () — ძველბერძნულ მითოლოგიაში მიკენის მეფის ატრევსის ძე, აგამემნონის ძმა, ელენეს ქმარი, შემდგომ მიკენისეული სპარტის მეფე. მენელაეს სამეფო ტახტზე ტინდარეოსის შემდეგ ავიდა, დანამდვილებით უცნობია, თუ როდის დაიწყო ან დამთავრდა მისი მმართველობა. მენელაეს შემდეგ კი სამეფო ტახტზე ორესტე ავიდა. პარისის მიერ მოტაცებული ელენეს დასაბრუნებლად მან აგამემნონთან ერთად ტროის წინააღმდეგ დაძრა აქაველები. იგი ტროის ომის ცენტრალური ფიგურა იყო. ილიადის მიხედვით ტროის ომში სწორედ მენელაე მეთაურობდა სპარტელთა ჯარს. ტროის დაცემის შემდეგ ელენესთან ერთად რვა წელი იხეტიალა აღმოსავლეთში (ეგვიპტეში, კ. კვიპროსზე) და ბოლოს მშვიდობიანად დაბრუნდა სპარტაში. როგორც ზევსის სიძე (ელენე ზევსის ასული იყო), მენელაე გარდაცვალების შემდეგ ნეტართა სამყოფელში, ელისეს მინდვრებზე მოხვდა. ლიტერატურა რესურსები ინტერნეტში სპარტის მეფეთა სია მენელაე — უცხო სიტყვათა ლექსიკონი სქოლიო სპარტის მეფეები ტროის ომის მონაწილეები ილიადას პერსონაჟები ოდისეის პერსონაჟები
__label__ka მალანგასი (ოფიციალურად მალანგასის მუნიციპალიტეტი; ; ) ― მესამე კლასის მუნიციპალიტეტი ზამბოანგა-სიბუგაის პროვინციაში, ფილიპინებში. 2020 წლის აღწერით, მუნიციპალიტეტის მოსახლეობა 32 022 ადამიანს შეადგენს. მოიცავს 25 ბარანგაის. კლიმატი რესურსები ინტერნეტში Malangas Profile at PhilAtlas.com Philippine Census Information სქოლიო ზამბოანგა-სიბუგაის მუნიციპალიტეტები
__label__ka ლჟევო () — სოფელი რუსეთში, ვოლოგდის ოლქში, უსტ-კუბინსკის რაიონში. სოფელი შედის უსტიანსკოეს სასოფლო დასახლების შემადგენლობაში შემადგენლობაში, 2002 წლის მონაცემებით სოფელში აღარავინ ცხოვრობდა. იხილეთ აგრეთვე უსტ-კუბინსკის რაიონის დასახლებული პუნქტები რესურსები ინტერნეტში http://vologda-oblast.ru/ru/government/municipalities/atu/index.php?okato_15=19+248+836+013 უსტ-კუბინსკის რაიონის დასახლებული პუნქტები
__label__ka ტინ-მინის ჩანჩქერი () — ჩანჩქერი სამხრეთ ავსტრალიაში, ახალი სამხრეთი უელსის შტატში. მდებარეობს კოსციუშკოს ეროვნული პარკში. ტინ-მინის ჩანჩქერის სიახლოვეს მდებარეობს ტასმანიის ზღვა, ხოლო 377 კილომეტრში — შტატის ადმინისტრაციული ცენტრი სიდნეი. იხილეთ აგრეთვე ავსტრალიის ჩანჩქერების სია რესურსები ინტერნეტში კოსციუშკოს ეროვნული პარკი ახალი სამხრეთი უელსის ჩანჩქერები
__label__ka სვერჩკოვო () — სოფელი რუსეთში, ვოლოგდის ოლქში, უსტ-კუბინსკის რაიონში. სოფელი შედის ვისოკოვის სასოფლო დასახლების შემადგენლობაში, მოსახლეობა 2002 წლის მონაცემებით 11 ადამიანს შეადგენდა. იხილეთ აგრეთვე უსტ-კუბინსკის რაიონის დასახლებული პუნქტები უსტ-კუბინსკის რაიონის დასახლებული პუნქტები
__label__ka ფენიქსი () — ნასას კოსმოსური აპარატი, რომლის დანიშნულება პლანეტა მარსის გამოკვლევაა. აპარატის გაშვება 2007 წლის 4 აგვისტოს განხორციელდა, მარსზე დაჯდომა მოსალოდნელია 2008 წლის მაისში. პლანეტის ზედაპირზე სამუშაოები არანაკლებ სამი თვის განმავლობაში უნდა ჩატარდეს. ფენიქსის დანიშნულება მარსის გრუნტის უფრო საფუძვლიანი შესწავლაა, ასევე მისი ატმოსფეროსა და მეტეოროლოგიური პროცესების გამოკვლევა. აპარატი პირველად მოახდენს დაჯდომის ადგილას ზედაპირის გაბურღვას მარსის ჩრდილოეთ პოლუსთან, სადაც საორბიტო აპარატმა "ოდისეა" აღმოაჩინა მიწისქვეშა ყინულის დიდი მარაგი. ერთ-ერთ ამოცანათაგანია ასევე სიცოცხლის ნიშნების აღმოჩენა. აპარატი ვერ შეძლებს პლანეტის ზედაპირზე გადაადგილებას. ფენიქსს სამეცნიერო მოწყობილობისა და ტექნიკური სისტემების მნიშვნელოვანი ნაწილი მეკვიდრეობით ერგო წარუმატებელი მისიისგან "Mars Polar Lander" და განუხორციელებელი მისიისგან "Mars Surveyor 2001 Lander", რამაც პროექტის შედარებითი სიიაფე განაპირობა - $420 მილიონი. მარსი აშშ-ის კოსმოსური პროგრამა არაპილოტირებადი კოსმოსური ხომალდები
__label__ka პლატფორმა () — ერთ-ერთი ყველაზე სკანდალური თანამედროვე ფრანგი მწერლის მიშელ უელბეკის რომანი, რომელიც პირველად 2001 წელს გამოიცა. „პლატფორმა“ უელბეკის ერთ-ერთი ყველაზე პოპულარული რომანია. რომანში აღწერილია თანამედროვე ევროპა — ადამიანის მარტოობა, ცხოვრების აბსურდულობა, კულტურის კომერციალიზაცია, სექსი და ტერორიზმი, რომელიც ყველაფერს ანადგურებს. რესურსები ინტერნეტში 'Confused Extremes' მიშელ უელბეკის ნაწარმოებები 2001 წლის რომანები
__label__ka რიჩარდ სერა (Richard Serra; დ. 2 ნოემბერი, 1939) — ამერიკელი მინიმალისტი მოქანდაკე და ვიდეო ხელოვანი, ცნობილი დიდი მასშტაბის ლითონის ფურცლების კომპოზიციებით. მოძრაობა "პროცეს-არტი"-ს მიმდევარი. დაიბადა სან-ფრანცისკოში. ჯერ ბერკლიში სწავლობდა ინგლისურ ლიტერატურას, შემდეგ კი სანტა-ბარბარაში. 1961-64 წლებში იელის უნივერსიტეტში სწავლობს ხელოვნების ფაკულტეტზე. ამჟამად ცხოვრობს და მოღვაწეობს ნიუ-იორკსა და ნოვა-სკოტიაში. რესურსები ინტერნეტში ენციკლოპედია „ბრიტანიკა“ ამერიკელი მოქანდაკეები დაბადებული 2 ნოემბერი დაბადებული 1939
__label__ka მოვლენები დაიბადნენ იანვარი თებერვალი მარტი აპრილი მაისი ივნისი ივლისი აგვისტო სექტემბერი ოქტომბერი ნოემბერი დეკემბერი თარიღი უცნობია მენ ხაოჟანი — ჩინელი პოეტი (გ. 740) გარდაიცვალნენ იანვარი თებერვალი მარტი აპრილი მაისი ივნისი ივლისი აგვისტო სექტემბერი ოქტომბერი ნოემბერი დეკემბერი თარიღი უცნობია da:680'erne#689
__label__ka ბათუმის საზღვაო ნავსადგური — საქართველოს უდიდესი საზღვაო ნავსადგური. მდებარეობს ქალაქ ბათუმში, შავი ზღვის სამხრეთ-აღმოსავლეთ სანაპიროზე. მის ტვირთბრუნვაში წამყვანი ადგილი უჭირავს ნავთობს. ისტორია XIX საუკუნის 80-იან წლებამდე ბათუმში შედიოდა მხოლოდ მცირე წყალწყვის გემები და მისი ტვირთბუნვა უმნიშვნელო იყო. 1878 წელს ბათუმის რუსეთის იმპერიის მიერ დაპყრობის შემდეგ ქალაქი განვითარდა. 1883 წელს ბათუმის ნავსადგურიდან გავიდა 3,3 მილიონი ფუთი ნავთობი. ახალი ნავსადგური აშენდა 1884-89 წლებში. ადმირალ გრევეს პროექტით ნავსადგური მდინარე ყოროლისწყალზე უნდა აშენებულიყო, მაგრამ თანხების ნაკლებობის გამო ის პროექტი არ მიიღეს. ამას ხელი შეუწყო 1883 წელს ბათუმში რკინიგზის გაყვანამ, 1893 წელს ტანკერების და მშრალი ტვირთის გემების ნავმისადგომის აშენებამ, 1907 წელს ბაქო-ბათუმის ნავთობსადენის გაყვანამ. 1913 წელს ბათუმის ნავსადგურიდან გატანილ იქნა 93 მილიონ ფუთ ნავთობზე მეტი. საბჭოთა პერიოდში დაიდგა მაღალმწარმოებლური გადამტვირთავი მოწყობილობა, გაფართოვდა ნავმისადგომი, გაიზრდა მისადგომის სიღრმე, აშენდა საზღვაო ვაგზალი. საბჭოთა პერიოდში ნავსადგური დაკავშირებული იყო 90-მდე ქვეყანასთან. ლიტერატურა სქოლიო ბათუმის ეკონომიკა საქართველოს პორტები
__label__ka ხარდისარის ნაეკლესიარი (კაუთა) — არქიტექტურული ძეგლი, საკულტო ნაგებობა ონის მუნიციპალიტეტის სოფელ ხარდისარში, ადგილი კაუთა. აგებულია შუა საუკუნეებში. საშუალო ზომის დარბაზული ეკლესია ნაგები ყოფილა დიდი ზომის ფლეთილი ქვით. ნაგებობა მთლიანად დანგრეულია და დაფარულია მცენარეებით. ტერიტორიის გაწმენდის გარეშე გეგმის გამოვლენა შეუძლებელია. ლიტერატურა შიდა ქართლი, ჯავის რაიონის არქიტექტურული მემკვიდრეობა, ტ. III, თბ., 2004 ონის მუნიციპალიტეტის ტაძრები
__label__ka ძუკუ ლოლუას სახელობის ქართული ხალხური სიმღერის მუზეუმი მდებარეობს ხობის მუნიციპალიტეტში. მუზეუმი გაიხსნა 2007 წლის 1 ივნისს, აქ გამოფენილია მეგრული სიმღერის შემსრულებელ ოსტატთა ფოტო მასალები, დოკუმენტები, სიგელები, საფესტივალო გამოფენები, კომპაქტ დისკები. მუზეუმი დაფუძნებულია ``განათლების, კულტურისა და სულიერების საერთაშორისო საქველმოქმედო ფონდ-ხობი``-ს მიერ. პრეზიდენტი გოდერძი ბუკია. ხობის მუნიციპალიტეტის მუზეუმები
__label__ka მოვლენები 5 აპრილი : ინგლის-ჰოლანდიის ომი (1652-1654) დასრულდა უესტმინსტერის ხელშეკრულებით. 7 ივნისი : ლუი XIV საფრანგეთის მეფე გახდა. დაიბადნენ იანვარი თებერვალი მარტი აპრილი მაისი ივნისი ივლისი აგვისტო სექტემბერი ოქტომბერი ნოემბერი დეკემბერი 27 დეკემბერი : იაკობ ბერნული — შვეიცარიელი მათემატიკოსი (გ. 1705) თარიღი უცნობია ჯონ ბელერზი — ინგლისელი ეკონომისტი (გ. 1725) გარდაიცვალნენ იანვარი თებერვალი მარტი აპრილი მაისი ივნისი 10 ივნისი : ალესანდრო ალგარდი — იტალიელი მოქანდაკე (დ. 1598) ივლისი აგვისტო სექტემბერი ოქტომბერი ნოემბერი დეკემბერი თარიღი უცნობია
__label__ka დემოკრატიული კავშირი ინტეგრაციისთვის (, ) — უმსხვილესი პოლიტიკური პარტია, რომელიც ასახავს ალბანელთა ინტერესს მაკედონიაში. იდეოლოგია და სიმბოლიკა პარტიის ემბლემაზე გამოსახულ ექვს ვარსკვლავს უკავშირებენ დიდი ალბანეთის ექვს ნაწილს — ჰიპოთეზურ ტერიტორიას, რომლის პოლიტიკური გაერთიანებასაც საკუთარ ვალდებულებად მიიჩნევენ ალბანელი ნაციონალისტები. ალბანეთი; ულცინი სამხრეთ-აღმოსავლეთ ჩერნოგორიაში; კოსოვო; პრეშევის ველი (პრეშევოს, მედვეჯისა და ბუიანოვაცის მუნიციპალიტეტი) სამხრეთ სერბეთში; მაკედონიის დასავლეთი რაიონები; ჩამერია — ჩრდილო-დასავლეთი საბერძნეთი. იხილეთ აგრეთვე მაკედონიის მთავრობა რესურსები ინტერნეტში Democratic Union for Integration სეპარატისტული პარტიები მაკედონიის ნაციონალისტური პარტიები მაკედონიის პოლიტიკური პარტიები
__label__ka კომბოსტოს თეთრი სიდამპლე — კომბოსტოს სოკოვანი დაავადება. მისი გამომწვევია სოკო Sclerotinia sclerotiorum. ვეგეტაციის დროს დაავადების გაჩენისას ზიანდება ფესვის ყელი და ქვედა ფოთლები. დაზიანებული ქსოვილები უფერულდება, სველდება და მათ ზევით ყალიბდება სოკოს ხავერდისებრი თეთრი მიცელიუმები. თეთრი სიდამპლე განსაკუთრებით სახიფათოა შენახვის პერიოდში. დაზიანება კომბოსტოს თავის გარეთა ფოთლებზე იწყება, განსაკუთრებით, წვიმიანი ამინდებში. კომბოსტოს თავზე ფოთლები იწყებს ლპობას, ხდება ლორწოვანი და მათ შორის ვითარდება მიცელიუმი, საიდანაც ჩნდება სკლეროციები. დაავადებულ კომბოსტოსთან კონტაქტის შედეგად დაავადება ადვილად გადადის საღ კომბოსტოებზეც. საწყობებში თეთრი სიდამპლის გავრცელებას ხელს უწყობს შენახვის რეჟიმის დარღვევა და მაღალი ტენიანობა. საწყობების დეზინფექცია, დაზიანებული მცენარეების მოცილება და განადგურება, შენახვის ოპტიმალური პირობების დაცვა, შესაბამისი წამლობების განხორციელება. სქოლიო კომბოსტოს დაავადებები
__label__ka კოსმოსის ეპოქა — თანამედროვე პერიოდი, რომელიც მოიცავს ადამიანის მიღწევებს კოსმოსის ათვისებასთან, კოსმოსურ რბოლასთან, კოსმოსურ ტექნოლოგიასთან და ამ მოვლენების გავლენით წარმოქმნილ სხვა კულტურულ განვითარებასთან დაკავშირებით. კოსმოსური ეპოქა დაიწყო 1957 წლის 4 ოქტომბერს, როდესაც სსრ კავშირის მიერ გაშვებულ იქნა დედამიწის ხელოვნური თანამგზავრი. ადამიანის პირველი კოსმოსური გაფრენა განხორციელდა 1961 წლის 12 აპრილს (იური გაგარინი, სსრ კავშირი), ხოლო მთვარეზე ადამიანთა პირველი გადასვლა 1969 წლის 21 ივლისით თარიღდება (ნეილ არმსტრონგი, ბაზ ოლდრინი, აშშ). კოსმოსური აპარატების ფრენის უზრუნველსაყოფად შექმნილია კოსმოდრომები, მართვის და კავშირგაბმულობის სამსახურები სხვა. დღეისათვის კოსმოსში გაშვებულია 3 ათასზე მეტი აპარატი, რამდენიმე ათეული ეკიპაჟი. ავტომატური აპარატებით ხდება მარსის, ვენერას, მერკურის, იუპიტერის, სატურნის გამოკვლევები, აგრეთვე დედამიწის ბუნებრივი რესურსების შესწავლა. ასტრონავტიკა მეცნიერებისა და წარმოების პროგრესის ერთ-ერთი სტიმულატორია. რესურსები ინტერნეტში კოსმოსის ქრონოლოგია კოსმოსის ეპოქისა და სპუტნიკის 50-ე წლისთავი. ნასა - ინტერაქტიული მედია სქოლიო უახლესი ისტორია
__label__ka ივანე ნიკოლოზის ძე აფხაზი (დ. 1785 ― გ. 1831) — თავადი, რუსეთის არმიის გენერალ-მაიორი (1827). ბიოგრაფია მდივანბეგ ნიკოლოზ აფხაზის და მეფე გიორგი XII-ის ნათლულის სოფიო ნიკოლოზ ასულ გურამიშვილის შვილი. 1800 წელს ჩაირიცხა ეგერთა მე-17 პოლკში, იბრძოდა ომარ-ხანის წინააღმდეგ (ნიახურის ბრძოლა, 1800). მონაწილეობდა ყარაბაღის (1805), ყარაბაბის (1808), ასლანდუზისა (1812) და ლენქორანის (1813) ბრძოლებში. 1820 წლიდან იყო ეგერთა 44-ე პოლკის უფროსი, 1822 წლიდან - იმერეთის, 1827 წლიდან აზერბაიჯანის პროვინციების (ყარაბაღი, ნუხა, შირვანი) მმართველი. თავი გამოიჩინა, როგორც ნიჭიერმა ადმინისტრატორმა. რუსეთ-ირანის 1826-1828 წლებისა და რუსეთ-ოსმალეთის 1828-1829 წლების ომების დროს ჩაშალა აგენტების ცდა რუსეთის წინააღმდეგ აეჯანყებინათ ამიერკავკასიის მაჰმადიანური პროვინციების მოსახლეობა. 1830 წელს დაინიშნა ჩრდილოეთ ოსეთის სამხედრო ექსპედიციის უფროსად და დიდი როლი შეასრულა ჩრდილოეთ ოსეთის რუსეთთან შეერთებაში. ერთხანს იყო ვლადიკავკაზის კომენდანტი, შემდეგ გაიწვიეს პოლონეთში (გარდაიცვალა გზაში). ლიტერატურა ქართველი თავადები ქართველი გენერლები საქართველოს საისტორიო და საეთნოგრაფიო საზოგადოების წევრები დაბადებული 1785 გარდაცვლილი 1831 რუსეთის იმპერიის გენერალ-მაიორები ივანე
__label__ka სორი — სოფელი საქართველოში, რაჭა-ლეჩხუმისა და ქვემო სვანეთის მხარის ონის მუნიციპალიტეტში, თემის ცენტრი (სოფლები: გადამში, ჭვებარი), მდებარეობს მდინარე რიონის მარჯვენა მხარეს. ამბროლაური-ონის საავტომობილო გზაზე. ზღვის დონიდან 720 მეტრი, ონიდან 14 კილომეტრი. წყაროებში პირველად მოხსენიებულია XVIII საუკუნეში. დემოგრაფია 2014 წლის აღწერის მონაცემებით სოფელში ცხოვრობს 194 ადამიანი. იხილეთ აგრეთვე სორის მონასტერი ლიტერატურა სქოლიო ონის მუნიციპალიტეტის სოფლები
__label__ka ვლადიმირის ღვთისმშობლის ხატის დღესასწაული წელიწადში სამჯერ აღესრულება: 3 ივნისს, 6 ივლისს და 8 სექტემბერს. ისტორია ვლადიმირის ღვთისმშობლის ხატი გადმოცემით ლუკა მახარებლის მიერ იმ მაგიდის დაფაზეა დაწერილი, რომელზედაც იესო ქრისტე თავის დედასთან მარიამთან და მართალ იოსებთან ერთად ტრაპეზობდა. გადმოცემით, ხატი ღვთისმშობლის მიძინებამდე დაიწერა. 450 წელს იმპერატორ თეოდორე უმცროსის დროს ხატი იერუსალიმიდან კონსტანტინოპოლში გადაიტანეს, მაგრამ XII საუკუნის დასაწყისში კონსტანტინოპოლიდან კიევში წაიღეს. 1155 წელს დიდმა მთავარმა იურიმ ვიშგოროდი თავის ვაჟს, მთავარ ანდრიას დაგასცა. ვიშგოროდის სავანის კლირიკოსებმა ერთხელ ტაძარში შესვლისას დაინახეს, რომ ხატი თავისი ადგილიდან გადმოსულიყო დაეკლესიის შუაგულში ჰაერში იდგა. ხატი ძველ ადგილას დააბრუნეს, მაგრამ მალე ნახეს, რომ ხატი კვლავ ჰაერში ეკიდა. მთავარი ანდრია მიეახლა ხატს და მხურვალებით ლოცულობდა მის წინაშე, შემდეგ პარაკლისი აღასრულა, ღვთისმოსაობით აიღო ხატი, სხვა საგანძური და ღამით, მამის ნებართვის გარეშე ვიშგოროდიდან წავიდა. ხატის ასლთა გალერეა რესურსები ინტერნეტში ვლადიმირის ღვთისმშობლის ხატები ღვთისმშობლის ხატები
__label__ka კასას-დე-დონ-გომესი () — მუნიციპალიტეტი ესპანეთში, შედის ესტრემადურის ავტონომიური გაერთიანების კასერესის პროვინციის რივერა-დე-ფრესნედოსის კომარკის შემადგენლობაში. ფართობი — 31 კმ². მოსახლეობა — 283 კაცი (2020 წ.). იხილეთ აგრეთვე კასერესის მუნიციპალიტეტები რესურსები ინტერნეტში კასას-დე-დონ-გომესის მუნიციპალიტეტის ოფიციალური საიტი სქოლიო კასერესის მუნიციპალიტეტები
__label__ka ინდაბიდი — ანშანისა და სუზის მეფე ჰუმბან-ტაჰრიდების დინასტიდან. ინდაბიდი სამეფო ტახტზე ტამარიტუს შემდეგ ავიდა, მისი მმართველობა დაიწყო ძვ. წ. 649 წელს და დასრულდა ძვ. წ. 648 წელს, მის შემდეგ სამეფო ტახტზე ჰუმბან-ნალტაში III ავიდა. რესურსები ინტერნეტში ანტიკური ირანი ანშანისა და სუზის მეფეები
__label__ka ჰაუსი (ინგლ. House music) — ელექტრონული საცეკვაო მუსიკის ერთ-ერთი ჟანრი. ეტიმოლოგია ტერმინ ჰაუს მუსიკის წარმოშობასთან დაკავშირებით აზრთა სხვადასხვაობა არსებობს. ეს ცნება შესაძლოა წარმომდგარიყო კლუბ The Warehouse-ის სახელწოდებისაგან, რომელიც 1970-იანი და 1980-იანი წლების მიჯნაზე ჩიკაგოელ თინეიჯერებს შორის იყო პოპულარული. პოპულარობით სარგებლობდა ერთ-ერთი რეზიდენტი დიჯეი — Frankie Knuckles, რომლის მუსიკა კლასიკური დისკოს, ევროპული სინთპოპის, ახალი ტალღის, ინდასტრიალისა და პანკის ერთგვარი ნაზავი იყო. მოგვიანებით, როცა დიჯეიმ თავისი მუსიკა ჩანაწერის სახით გამოუშვა, მას House, ანუ ქართულად ჰაუს მუსიკა (უხეშად, მუსიკა ჰაუსიდან) ეწოდა. არსებობს ვარაუდი, რომ ტერმინ ჰაუსის ("House") წარმოშობა სიტყვის მნიშვნელობასვე (სახლი) უნდა უკავშირდებოდეს. წინათ ბევრი დიჯეი მუსიკას სახლში ქმნიდა და ისეთ მარტივ მოწყობილობებს გამოიყენებდა, როგორიცაა სინთეზატორი და დრამები, Roland TR-808, TR-909 და TB 303 "Bassline". მსგავსი მოწყობილობები ცნობილი გახდა "Acid Machines"-ის მეშვეობით, რომელთაც "acid house"-ის ბგერების შესაქმნელად გამოიყენებდნენ. ელექტრონული მუსიკა
__label__ka აბანი () — დაბა რუსეთში, კრასნოიარსკის მხარეში. აბანის რაიონის ადმინისტრაციული ცენტრი. მდებარეობს მდინარე აბანზე (ენისეის აუზი), რკინიგზის სადგურ კანსკ-ენისეისკიდან (კრასნოიარსკი – ირკუტსკის ხაზი) 62 კმ-ით ჩრდილო-აღმოსავლეთით. 8618 მცხოვრები (2021). სქოლიო რუსეთის დაბები
__label__ka წამწამიანი ჭიები, ტურბელარიები () — ბრტყელი ჭიების კლასი; ორმხრივ-სიმეტრიული ცხოველების ყველაზე პრიმიტიული ჯგუფი. აქვთ თითისტარის, წვეთის, ფოთლის ან თასმისებური ფორმის სხეული, რომლის სიგრძე მმ-ის მერამდენიმე ნაწილიდან 35 სმ აღწევს. დაფარულია წამწამოვანი ეპითელიუმით. მარტივი ფორმები მოძრაობენ წამწამებით, მსხვილი — კუნთების შეკუმშვით. სხეულის ღრუ არა აქვთ, შინაგან ორგანოთა შორის არეები პარენქიმითაა ამოვსებული. პირის ღრუ მოთავსებულია მუცლის მხარეზე, სხეულის შუაში, წინა ან უკანა ბოლოზე. პრიმიტიულ ფორმებში საჭმლის მონელება განსაკუთრებულ საჭმლის მომნელებელ უჯრედებსა ან პარენქიმის განსაკუთრებულ ღრუებში. დანარჩენ წამწამიანი ჭიებს აქვთ ტომრისებრი ან განტოტვილი ნაწლავი. უკანა ხვრელი არ გააჩნიათ. სუნთქავენ კანით. ლიტერატურა წამწამიანი ჭიები
__label__ka ვინსენტ "ჩენსუ" ტაბონე (დ. 30 მარტი, 1913, ვიქტორია, გოცო — გ. 14 მარტი, 2012 ) — მალტელი სახელმწიფო და პოლიტიკური მოღვაწე. მალტის რესპუბლიკის პრეზიდენტი (1989–1994). ბიოგრაფია ჩენსუ ტაბონე დაიბადა ნიკოლო ტაბონესა და ელიზა ნი კალეჯას 10 შვილიან ოჯახში. რესურსები ინტერნეტში ჩენსუ ტაბონე მალტის პრეზიდენტები მალტელი პოლიტიკოსები დაბადებული 30 მარტი დაბადებული 1913 გარდაცვლილი 14 მარტი კატეგორია:გარდაცვლილი 2012
__label__ka საკუთარი სახელი მირზაშვილი შეიძლება აღნიშნავდეს ერთ-ერთ შემდეგ პიროვნებათაგანს: ალექსანდრე მირზაშვილი — ინჟინერი, პოლიტიკოსი გიორგი მირზაშვილი — მხატვარი, პოეტი თენგიზ მირზაშვილი — ფერმწერი, გრაფიკოსი, თეატრის მხატვარი რევაზ მირზაშვილი — კინოს მხატვარი სოფიო მირზაშვილი — მხატვარი ქართული გვარები
__label__ka კურიმანის რაიონი () — რაიონი პერუში, უკაიალის რეგიონის პადრე-აბადის პროვინციაში. მდებარეობს ზღვის დონიდან 287 მეტრზე. 2007 წლის მონაცემებით, მოსახლეობა 22 933 ადამიანს შეადგენდა, სიმჭიდროვე 4.9 ადამიანი კმ²-ზე. ფართობი 4 663 კმ²-ია. იხილეთ აგრეთვე პერუს რაიონები რესურსები ინტერნეტში 2007 წლის აღწერის მონაცემები პერუს სტატისტიკისა და ინფორმაციის ეროვნული ინსტიტუტი უკაიალის რეგიონის რაიონები პადრე-აბადის პროვინციის რაიონები
__label__ka გაგიდა — მდინარე საქართველოში, აფხაზეთის ავტონომიური რესპუბლიკის გალის მუნიციპალიტეტში. მიედინება სამურზაყანოს დაბლობზე. წარმოიქმნება მდინარეების ხუმუშქურისა და კირის შეერთებით. სიგრძე 6,3 კმ, აუზის ფართობი 270 კმ². ერთვის შავ ზღვას სოფელ გაგიდასთან. საზრდოობს წვიმის წყლით. მთავარი შენაკადებია ოჯოგორა (მარჯვნივ) და ოკვინორე (მარცხნივ). სქოლიო აფხაზეთის ავტონომიური რესპუბლიკის მდინარეები შავ ზღვაში ჩამდინარე მდინარეები
__label__ka „ევიტა“ ()— ოსკარის მფლობელი მხატვრული ფილმი, რომელიც ენდრიუ ლოიდ უებერის თეატრალური მიუზიკლის ეკრანიზაციაა და ევა პერონის ცხოვრების შესახებ მოგვითხრობს. ფილმის რეჟისორია ალან პარკერი და მასში მადონა, ანტონიო ბანდერასი და ჯონათან პრაისი თამაშობენ. ფილმი 1996 წლის 25 დეკემბერს გამოვიდა და მისმა შემოსავალმა შეერთებულ შტატებში 50,047,179 აშშ დოლარი შეადგინა, ხოლო დანარჩენ მსოფლიოში 141 მილიონი. რესურსები ინტერნეტში 1996 წლის ფილმები მუსიკალური ფილმები ინგლისურენოვანი ფილმები ამერიკული ფილმები
__label__ka RealD 3D — სტერეოსკოპური ციფრული კინოფილმების პროექციის ტექნოლოგია, რომელსაც ქმნის და ყიდის კომპანია RealD. IMAX 3D-ისგან გასხვავებით, RealD არ მოითხოვს ორ კინოპროექტორს. დღესდღეობით ეს არის კინოთეატრებში 3D ფილმების საყურებლად ყველაზე გავრცელებული ტექნოლოგია. რესურსები ინტერნეტში სქოლიო კინო და ვიდეო ტექნოლოგია 3D გამოსახულება 3D კინო
__label__ka ლაროია () — მუნიციპალიტეტი ესპანეთში, შედის ანდალუსიის ავტონომიური გაერთიანების ალმერიის პროვინციის ვალიე-დელ-ალმანსორის კომარკის შემადგენლობაში. ფართობი — 22,2 კმ². მოსახლეობა — 192 კაცი (2020 წ.). იხილეთ აგრეთვე ალმერიის მუნიციპალიტეტები რესურსები ინტერნეტში ლაროიის მუნიციპალიტეტის ოფიციალური საიტი სქოლიო ალმერიის მუნიციპალიტეტები
__label__ka Moleskine (mɔleˈskiːne) — იტალიური კომპანია Modo & Modo-ს სავაჭრო ნიშანი. კომპანია აწარმოებს საკანცელარიო საქონელს, ძირითადად — ბლოკნოტებს. მისი პროდუქცია მთელ მსოფლიოშია გავრცელებული. კლასიკური ბლოკნოტი წარმოადგენს შავი ფერის ყდაში მოთავსებულს, რომელიც მაგრდება ელასტიური ზონარით, ახლავს სანიშნე და ბოლო გვერდზე არსებული ჯიბე სავიზიტო ბარათებისთვის. ბლოკნოტების სახასიათო თავისებურება არის პირველი გვერდი, რომელზეც მფლობელის სახელ-გვარი იწერება. მიუხედავად არსებული წარმოთქმისა იტალიურ ენაზე, სახელწოდებას ყველა თავისებურად წარმოთქვამს. რესურსები ინტერნეტში ოფიციალური საიტი სქოლიო საკანცელარიო საქონელი
__label__ka ტასკო () — ქალაქი და მუნიციპალიტეტი კოლუმბიაში, ბოიაკის დეპარტამენტში. მდებარეობს ზღვის დონიდან 2.571 მეტრზე. 2005 წლის მონაცემებით, მოსახლეობა 6 707 ადამიანს შეადგენდა, სიმჭიდროვე 40.16 ადამიანი კმ²-ზე. ფართობი 167 კმ²-ია. იხილეთ აგრეთვე კოლუმბიის ქალაქების სია რესურსები ინტერნეტში კოლუმბიის მოსახლეობის 2005 წლის აღწერის მონაცემები — კოლუმბიის სტატისტიკის ეროვნული დეპარტამენტი statoids.com-ის მონაცემები ბოიაკის დეპარტამენტის მუნიციპალიტეტები და ქალაქები
__label__ka ლოს-ბანკოსის კანტონი () — კანტონი ეკვადორში, პიჩინჩის პროვინციაში. ადმინისტრაციული ცენტრია ქალაქი სან-მიგელ-დე-ლოს-ბანკოსი. 2001 წლის აღწერის მონაცემებით მოსახლეობა 10 717 ადამიანს შეადგენდა. სქოლიო პიჩინჩის პროვინციის კანტონები
__label__ka სალომე ჭულუხაძე (დ. 30 ნოემბერი, 1987) — ქართველი მსახიობი. განსაკუთრებული პოპულარობა მოუტანა სერიალ „შუა ქალაქში“ ნათამაშებმა „სალომეს“ როლმა. 2011 წელს ითამაშა ფილმში „ისპაჰან-ბათუმი“. არის „თავისუფალი თეატრის“ მსახიობი. ფილმოგრაფია 2007-2010: „შუა ქალაქში“ (სალომე) 2011: „ისპაჰან - ბათუმი“ „ერთხელ შუა ქალაქში“ (სალომე) „ჩემი ცოლის დაქალები“ ნათამაშები როლები თავისუფალი თეატრი „ხომ ხოცავენ ქანცგაწყვეტილ ცხენებს“ „ღმერთო, დაგვიფარე ჩვენ და ადამიანები“ „ვალსი ძილის წინ“ „რიჩარდ III“ „მექანიკური ფორთოხალი“ „სამანიშვილის დედინაცვალი” „უსულო საგნები” „ვიზიტი ფსიქოლოგთან” „მგზნებარე შეყვარებული” „თაფლობის თვე” „რვა მოსიყვარულე ქალი” „რომეო+ჯულიეტა=?…” „ტარტიუფი“ რესურსები ინტერნეტში ეროვნული ფილმოგრაფია თავისუფალი თეატრის საიტზე დაბადებული 1987 დაბადებული 30 ნოემბერი ქართველი მსახიობები
__label__ka ჩერკიზოვსკაია () — მოსკოვის მეტროპოლიტენის სადგური. მდებარეობს სოკოლნიჩესკაიას ხაზზე და შედგება 1 კუნძულოვანი ბაქნისაგან. სადგური გაიხსნა 1990 წელს. რესურსები ინტერნეტში მოსკოვის მეტროპოლიტენის საიტი მოსკოვის მეტროსადგურები
__label__ka მალიბეილის აბანო ( — 300 წლის სეფიანთა დროის აბანო სოფელ მალიბეილიში. ეს არის რვაკუთხა აბანო ნაგებობა სპანდრილის თაღით, ორი გუმბათითა და წყლის აუზით. აბაზანას ჰქონდა ცალკე კანალიზაცია, ცხელი და ცივი წყალი. ეს აბანო ნაგებობა აშენდა აღმოსავლური არქიტექტურის სტილში. მალიბეილის აბანო, რომელიც ასახავს და ინარჩუნებს ანტიკური არქიტექტურის ეროვნულ თავისებურებებს, გამოიყენებოდა 1960 წლამდე. ადგილობრივების თქმით, ქალები მხოლოდ პარასკევს აბანოში ბანაობდნენ, დანარჩენ დღეებში კი კაცები. ამ აბანოში მოდიოდნენ და აქ ბანაობდნენ დღევანდელი ხანქენდიდან და მის მახლობლად არსებული დასახლებებიდან. შუშას აბანოები, რომლებიც მართლაც ლამაზი დასასვენებელი კუთხეებია, აზერბაიჯანში ამ დარგის არქიტექტურული ტრადიციების საფუძველზე აშენდა. სქოლიო აზერბაიჯანის ღირსშესანიშნაობები
__label__ka ხეობა — სოფელი საქართველოში, შიდა ქართლის მხარის ქარელის მუნიციპალიტეტში (ზემო ხვედურეთის თემი). მდებარეობს თრიალეთის ქედის ჩრდილოეთ კალთაზე, მდინარე ხვედრულის (მტკვრის მარჯვენა შენაკადი) ნაპირებზე. ზღვის დონიდან 770 მეტრი, ქარელიდან 8 კილომეტრი. სოფელში 1939 წელს აღმოაჩინეს სელჩუკური და მონღოლური მონეტების განძი. დემოგრაფია 2014 წლის აღწერის მონაცემებით სოფელში ცხოვრობს 179 ადამიანი. იხილეთ აგრეთვე ხეობის ივანე მახარებლის ეკლესია ხეობის მთავარანგელოზის ეკლესია ხეობის ღვთისმშობლის ეკლესია ლიტერატურა სქოლიო ქარელის მუნიციპალიტეტის სოფლები
__label__ka ერერა-დელ-დუკე () — და მუნიციპალიტეტი ესპანეთში, შედის ესტრემადურის ავტონომიური გაერთიანების ბადახოსის პროვინციის ლა-სიბერიის კომარკის შემადგენლობაში. ფართობი — 277,3 კმ². მოსახლეობა — 3489 კაცი (2020 წ.). იხილეთ აგრეთვე ბადახოსის მუნიციპალიტეტები რესურსები ინტერნეტში ერერა-დელ-დუკეს მუნიციპალიტეტის ოფიციალური საიტი სქოლიო ბადახოსის მუნიციპალიტეტები
__label__ka კიკინდის თემი () — თემი სერბეთში, შედის ჩრდილო-ბანატის ოლქში. თემის მოსახლეობა შეადგენს 63 324 ადამიანს (2007 წლის აღწერის მონაცემები), მოსახლეობის სიმჭიდროვე შეადგენს 81 ადამ./კმ². თემის ფართობი — 782 კმ². თემის ადმინისტრაციული ცენტრი — ქალაქი კიკინდა. კიკინდის თემი შედგება 10 დასახლებული პუნქტისგან, მათი საშუალო ფართობია 78.2 კმ². თემის მოსახლეობის სტატისტიკა რესურსები ინტერნეტში სერბეთის ოფიციალური სტატისტიკა სქოლიო სერბეთის თემები
__label__ka დირსიჭალა, დარსიჭალა — უბანი (ძველად — ბაღები) თბილისის აღმოსავლეთ ნაწილში, ისნის რაიონში (ნავთლუღი), ნავთლუღის ხევის მარჯვენა მხარეს, მტკვრის მარცხენა ნაპირზე, ორთაჭალის მოპირდაპირედ. ეს სახელი თბილისის სანახებში XVIII საუკუნეში გაჩნდა. აღნიშნულია თბილისის 1876 და 1910 წლების გეგმებზე. XVII-XVIII საუკუნეებში დირსიჭალას ბაღები ერთმანეთისგან მიჯნავდა ავლაბარსა და ნავთლუღს. დირსიჭალა თავისი ბაღებით, ისევე, როგორც ორთაჭალა, XIX საუკუნეშიც ინარჩუნებდა თავის მნიშვნელობას, როგორც ქალაქის პირას მდებარე ერთ-ერთი სასოფლო-სამეურნეო ერთეული. XIX საუკუნის 40-იანი წლებში ნავთლუღის სამხედრო დასახლება («Слободка Навтлуг») უშუალოდ ესაზღვრებოდა დირსიჭალას ჩრდილოეთიდან, ხოლო თვით სოფელი ნავთლუღი — აღმოსავლეთიდან. ტოპონიმი შენარჩუნებულია დღევანდელი დირსიჭალის ქუჩის დასახელებაში, ჩოლოყაშვილის (ყოფ. 5 დეკემბრის) ქუჩის მართობულად, XIX საუკუნის ბოლოს აგებული წმ. ბარბარეს (ზემო) ეკლესიის ახლოს. დირსიჭალაში ბაღები არსებობდა XX საუკუნის 50-იანი წლების ბოლომდე. იხილეთ აგრეთვე დირსი ლიტერატურა კვირკველია, თ., ძველთბილისური დასახელებანი, გვ. 31-32. «საბჭოთა საქართველო», თბ., 1985; თბილისის ისტორია თბილისის უბნები
__label__ka Պ, պ () — სომხური ანბანის ოცდამეექვსე ასო. ტრანსკრიფციაა — [p]; გამოითქმის, როგორც ქართული „პ“; რიცხვითი მნიშვნელობაა — 800 (რვაასი). ბრაილი რესურსები ინტერნეტში Graphemica (Պ) Graphemica (պ) სომხური ასოები
__label__ka აღა მიქაილის აბანო () — ძველებური აბანო, განლაგებულია ბაქოს (აზერბაიჯანის) ისტორიულ უბანში. აბანო ასენდა შემახის მაცხოვრებლის, ჰაჯი აღა მიქაელის მიერ, უბანში, რომელიც დღემდე ატარებს „აბანოთ უბანის“ სახელს. აღა მიქაელის აბანოში გადაღებულ იქნა არაერთი მხატვრული ფილმი, მათ შორის „ეს თუ არა ის“, უზეირ ჰაჯიბეკოვის იმავე სახელწოდების ოპერეტის მოტივებზე. ამის გამო ხალხი ამ აბანოს მაშადი იბადის (ფილმის მთავარი პერსონაჟი), სახელწოდებით მოიხსენიებს.</ref>. В связи с этим баню называют в народе и баней Мешади Ибада, главного героя комедии აზერბაიჯანის რესპუბლიკის მინისტრთა კაბინეტის განკარგულებით აღა მიქაელის აბანოს მიენიჭა „კულტურული მემკვიდრეობის ისტორიული ძეგლის სტატუსი“. 2011 წელს აზერბაიჯანის მინისტრთა კაბინეტის „ქალაქ ბაქოს ცენტრის კონსერვაციის გენერალური გეგმიდან“ გამომდინარე აბანოს ჩაუტარდა რესტავრაცია უცხოელი სპეციალისტების აქტიური მონაწილეობით. სქოლიო აზერბაიჯანის ღირსშესანიშნაობები XVIII საუკუნე ხელოვნებაში ბაქოს ღირსშესანიშნაობები
__label__ka ჰასანგულულარი () — სოფელი აზერბაიჯანში, ზემო ყარაბაღის რეგიონში, შუშის რაიონში, სოფელ საფიხანლარის ადმინისტრაციულ თემში. 1992 წლიდან ოკუპირებულია სომხეთის შეიარაღებული ძალების მიერ. სქოლიო შუშის რაიონის სოფლები
__label__ka პეტერგოფი (, თავადპ. , „პიტერის ეზო“) — სასახლეებისა და ბაღების კომპლექსი, რომელიც პეტრე დიდის ბრძანებით გაშენდა სანქტ-პეტერბურგიდან დასავლეთით ექვსიოდე კილომეტრში ფინეთის ყურის ნაპირას, ბალტიის ზღვასთან და მას ხშირად „რუსულ ვერსალსაც“ უწოდებენ. ამავე არემარეში არსებობს იგივე სახელწოდების მცირე ქალაქი 82.000 მცხოვრებით. სასახლე-ბაღების ანსამბლი და ქალაქის ცენტრი იუნესკოს მსოფლიო კულტურული მემკვიდრეობის ძეგლთა სიაშია შეტანილი. იხილეთ აგრეთვე იუნესკოს მსოფლიო მემკვიდრეობის ძეგლები რუსეთში რესურსები ინტერნეტში პეტერგოფის მუზეუმი ბაროკოს არქიტექტურა რუსეთის სასახლეები სამეფო რეზიდენციები სანქტ-პეტერბურგი მსოფლიო მემკვიდრეობის ძეგლები რუსეთში
__label__ka სვერის მღვიმე — კარსტული მღვიმე ჭიათურის მუნიციპალიტეტის სოფელ სვერის მიდამოებში, 690 მ სიმაღლეზე. გამომუშავებულია ზედაცარცულ კირქვებში. მღვიმის წინა მონაკვეთი სუბჰორიზონტულია, ბოლო — საფეხურებიანი. ჯამური სიგრძეა — 280 მ. გვხვდება სტალაქტიტები, სტალაგმიტები, კედლის ნაღვენთები და ნგრეული მასალა. ლიტერატურა ჭიათურის მუნიციპალიტეტის მღვიმეები
__label__ka არაფრის.
__label__ka მობრძანდით.
__label__ka აახვიე აქედან!
__label__ka უკაცრავად. თქვენ ის პიროვნება ხართ?
__label__ka ტოსტერის შეკეთება მომიხდა.
__label__ka ფეხმძიმედ ვარ.
__label__ka ფასების გააგრძელებენ ზრდას.
__label__ka ჯანდაბა, დაიწყე!
__label__ka ის კარგი მოლაპარაკეა ინგლისურად. (?)
__label__ka მას ორი წიგნი აქვს დაწერილი.
__label__ka მობრძანდით!
__label__ka ყოველთვის ვუყურებ ამ სურათს მორყვნით.
__label__ka მე მიყვარს ისტორიის სწავლა.
__label__ka მე შენს მხარეს ვარ.
__label__ka გამარჯობა.
__label__ka მან მითხრა, რომ აგვისტოში პარიზში წავიდოდა.
__label__ka პატარძალივით აცვია.
__label__ka შენ ყოველთვის მღერი.
__label__ka გუშინ იყო კვირა, შაბათი კი არა.
__label__ka მისი საშუალებით გაიცნეს ერთმანეთი.
__label__ka დიახ.
__label__ka მე ამ ტენის კლუბის წევრი ვარ.
__label__ka შეუძლებელია კონფლიქტის გადაჭრა.
__label__ka მას ნათელი მომავალი აქვს.
__label__ka მე დავიფიცე, რომ არასოდეს აღარ დაველაპარაკები.
__label__ka მახსოვს, ადრე შევხვდი იმ პიროვნებას კემბრიჯში
__label__ka ვინ იყო ექსპედიციის წინამძღოლი?
__label__ka წერილი ბარდება დღეში ერთხელ.
__label__ka მას ძალიან უყვარს თავისი სკოლა.
__label__ka მისტერ იმემურა გვასწავლის ინგლისურს.
__label__ka რამდენი ხანია ხართ იაპონიაში?
__label__ka აქ რომ დავაყენო შეიძლება?
__label__ka მოწევა ბევრ ზიანს აყენებს.
__label__ka ეს სიტყვების თამაშია.
__label__ka 10 საათამდე არ დაბრუნებულა.
__label__ka თუ იჩქარებ, დაეწევი.
__label__ka მან თავისი უპასუხისმგებლობით მეც შემცვალა.
__label__ka სამი ცალი მომეცით გეთაყვა.
__label__ka მისს სატო, პრეზიდენტის ახალი მდივანია.
__label__ka 100 წლამდე იცოცხლებს.
__label__ka ზამთარში ადრე ღამდება.
__label__ka ხვალ შეგიძლია დამიკავშირდე.
__label__ka ის გუნდის კაპიტანია.
__label__ka სკოლის დამთავრებამდე მოვიდა აქ.
__label__ka კინაღამ დამრჩა მატარებელში ჩემი ქოლგა.
__label__ka სახლში თუ დამაგვიანდება წასვლა, ნუ დამელოდები.
__label__ka ჩვეს სკოლას ჯამში აქვს ოცდაოთხი კლასი.
__label__ka მოკლედ ის არასწორი იყო.
__label__ka ყოველთვის დასცინის სხვებს.
__label__ka ვესვრი!
__label__ka მის სატო, პრეზიდენტის ახალი მდივანია.
__label__ka წაეთრიე სკოლაში! შე ზარმაცო ნაბიჭვარო!
__label__ka ბევრი პრობლემა მაქვს მოსაგვარებელი.
__label__ka მან იმ ბიჭს თვალებში ჩახედა.
__label__ka პრეზერვატივი გააქვს?
__label__ka ერთი ნაბიჯი და მკვდარი კაცი ხარ.
__label__ka კეთილი იყოს თქვენი მობრძანება!
__label__ka ქოლგა მატარებელში დავტოვე.
__label__ka კეთილი იყოს შენი შინ დაბრუნება.
__label__ka გუშინწინ, მის მეგობარს შევხვდი ავტობუსში.
__label__ka მობრძანდით
__label__ka სამუშაოს მორჩი?
__label__ka ძალიან გიყვართ ერთმანეთი?
__label__ka მისი მდგომარეობა გაუარესდა.
__label__ka ამერიკელი ხარ თუ ფრანგი?
__label__ka სამი წლის წინ ვნახე.
__label__ka უეცრად მისი სახე გაფერმკრთალდა.
__label__ka ახლახანს დაბრუნდა სახლში.
__label__ka სახლში, რომ შევდიოდი ხალიჩას ფეხი წამოვკარი.
__label__ka სახლში, რომ შევდიოდი ხალიჩას ფეხით წამოვედე.
__label__ka ჩვენ მოგვიწია გეგმის მიტოვება.
__label__ka ნება მიბოძეთ წარმოგიდგინოთ ჩემი თავი.
__label__ka უკეთესი იქნებოდა, რომ არ წასულიყავი.
__label__ka როგორ ლაპარაკობს!
__label__ka მის ხმაში წუხილი იგრძნობოდა.
__label__ka როგორც იქნა შევხვდით! დიდხანს ველოდებოდი ამ დღეს!
__label__ka გემი ნაპირის გასწვრივ იყო.
__label__ka რატომ გაიქცა?
__label__ka მე არ ვიცი იაპონურად ლაპარაკი.
__label__ka ახალი მაღაზია მომავალ კვირას გაიხსნება.
__label__ka არავის არ ესმის ჩემი.
__label__ka მისთვის არაფერი არ გვითქვამს. (?)
__label__ka შენ საქმეს მიხედე!
__label__ka ჩვეს სკოლას ჯამში აქვს ოცდაოთხი (24) კლასი.
__label__ka ამ ცხოველს იაპონურად რა ქვია?
__label__ka ჩინელები ძალიან მეგობრულები არიან.
__label__ka მის-სატო, პრეზიდენტის ახალი მდივანია.
__label__ka დღესდღეობით იაპონია მიდის თვითგანადგურების გზაზე, არა?
__label__ka მან თქვა, რომ ბავშვების ყოლის არავითარი ინტერესი არ აქვს სანამ ოცდაათის არ გახდება.
__label__ka ძირითადად ბიჭებს უყვართ კომპიუტერული(Computer) თამაშები.
__label__ka მინდა რომ სამაგიერო გადაგიხადოთ თქვენი გულკეთილობისთვის უახლოეს მომავალში.
__label__ka პოლიციამ დაუყოვნებლივი ქმედება მიიღო, აჯანყებასთან გასამკლავებლად.
__label__ka მისი მშობლების აზრით, ის საკუთარ ფულს სულელ გოგოს ახარჯავდა.
__label__ka კომპიუტერს თუ გამოიყენებ ინფორმაციის შენახვას შეძლებ.
__label__ka მამაჩემი ხშირად წერდა წერილებს სადაც ციტირებდა შექსპირს.
__label__ka ყვილა ადამიანი იბადება თავისუფალი და თანასწორი თავისი ღირსებითა და უფლებებით. მათ მინიჭებული აქვთ გონება და სინდისი და ერთმანეთის მიმართ უნდა იქცეოდნენ ძმობის სულისკვეთებით.
__label__ka ყოველ ადამიანს აქვს უფლება ჰქონდეს ცხოვრების ისეთი დონე, საკვების, ტანსაცმლის, საცხოვრებლის , სამედიცინო მოვლისა და საჭირო სოციალური მომსახურეობის ჩათვლით, რომელიც აუცილებელია თვითონ მისი და მისი ოჯახის ჯანმრთელობისა და კეთილდღეობის შესანარჩუნებლად, და უფლება უზრუნველყოფილი იყოს უმუშევრობის, ავადმყოფობის, ინვალიდობის, ქვრივობის, მოხუცებულობის ან მისგან დამოუკიდებელ გარემოებათა გამო არსებობის საშუალებათა დაკარგვის სხვა შემთხვევაში.
__label__ka ყოველ ადამიანს აქვს უფლება ისეთ სოციალურ და საერთაშორისო წესრიგზე, რომლის პირობებშიც შესაძლებელია ამ დეკლარაციაში ჩამოთვლილი უფლებათა და თავისუფლებათა მთლიანად განხორციელება.
__label__ka ყოველ ადამიანს აქვს დასვენებისა და თავისუფალი დროის გამოყენების უფლება სამუშაო საათების გონივრული შეზღუდვისა და ანაზღაურებადი პერიოდული შვებულების უფლების ჩათვლით.
__label__ka თავისი უფლებათა და თავისუფლებათა განხორციელებისას ყოველი ადამიანი უნდა განიცდიდეს მხოლოდ ისეთ შეზღუდვებს, როგორიც კანონითაა დადგენილი მარტოოდენ იმ მიზნით, რათა უზრუნველყოფილ იქნეს სხვების უფლებათა და თავისუფლებათა ჯეროვანი აღიარება და პატივისცემა და დაკმაყოფილდეს ზნეობის, საზოგადოებრივი წესრიგისა და საერთო კეთილდღეობის სამართლიანი მოთხოვნები დემოკრატიულ საზოგადოებაში.
__label__ka ამ დეკლარაციაში არაფერი შეიძლება განიმარტოს, როგორც რომელიმე სახელმწიფოსათვის, პირთა ჯგუფისა თუ ცალკეული პირებისათვის უფლების მინიჭება, რაც მათი საქმიანობის ან გარკვეული ქმედებების შედეგად გამოიწვევს წინამდებარე დეკლარაციით გარანტირებულ უფლებათა და თავისუფლებათა მოსპობას.
__label__ka ვინაიდან ადამიანთა ოჯახის ყველა წევრისათვის დამახასიათებელი ღირსების და თანასწორი და განუყოფელი უფლებების აღიარება წარმოადგენს თავისუფლების, სამართლიანობის და საყოველთაო მშვიდობის საფუძველს; და
__label__ka ყოველი ადამიანი თანასწორია კანონის წინაშე და განურჩევლად რაიმე განსხვავებისა, ყველას აქვს უფლება თანაბრად იყოს დაცული კანონის მიერ. ყველა ადამიანს აქვს უფლება თანაბრად იყოს დაცული ამ დეკლარაციის დამრღვევი ყოველგვარი დისკრიმინაციისაგან და ასეთი დისკრიმინაციის ყოველგვარი წაქეზებისაგან.
__label__ka გენერალური ასამბლეა სრულწლოვან კაცებსა და ქალებს უფლება აქვთ რასის, ეროვნების ან რელიგიის ნიშნით რაიმე შეზღუდვის გარეშე, დაქორწინდნენ და შექმნან ოჯახი. ისინი სარგებლობენ ერთნაირი უფლებებით დაქორწინებისას, ქორწინებაში ყოფნის პერიოდში და განქორწინებისას.
__label__ka დედობა და ჩვილი ყრმის ასაკი იძლევა განსაკუთრებული მზრუნველობითა და დახმარებით სარგებლობის უფლებას. ყველა ბავშვი, დაბადებული ქორწინებაში თუ ქორწინების გარეშე, უნდა სარგებლობდეს ერთნაირი სოციალური დაცვით.
__label__ka ყოველ ადამიანს, რომელსაც ბრალად ედება დანაშაულის ჩადენა, უფლება აქვს უდანაშაულოდ ითვლებოდეს მანამ, სანამ მისი დამნაშავეობა დადგენილი არ იქნება კანონის შესაბამისად საჯარო სასამართლო მიერ, რომლის დროსაც უზრუნველყოფილი იქნება დაცვის ყველა შესაძლებლობით.
__label__ka არავის შეიძლება მსჯავრი დაედოს ისეთი მოქმედების ან უმოქმედობისათვის, რომელიც ჩადენის მომენტში არ წარმოადგენდა დანაშაულს ეროვნული ან საერთაშორისო სამართლის შესაბამისად. აგრეთვე, დაუშვებელია იმაზე უფრო მძიმე სასჯელის შეფარდება, ვიდრე გამოიყენებული იქნებოდა დანაშაულის ჩადენის დროს.
__label__ka ამ დეკლარაციით გამოცხადებული ყველა უფლება და ყველა თავისუფლება მინიჭებული უნდა ჰქონდეს ყოველ ადამიანს განურჩევლად რაიმე განსხვავებისა, სახელდობრ, რასის, კანის ფერის, სქესის, ენის, რელიგიის, პოლიტიკური თუ სხვა რწმენის, ეროვნული თუ სოციალური წარმომავლობის, ქონებრივი, წოდებრივი თუ სხვა მდგომარეობისა.
__label__ka ვინაიდან, ადამიანის უფლებათა უგულებელყოფამ და აბუჩად აგდებამ გამოიწვია ბარბაროსული აქტები, რაც აღაშფოთებს კაცობრიობის სინდისს, და რომ ისეთი მსოფლიოს შექმნა, რომელშიც ადამიანებს ექნებათ სიტყვისა და რწმენის თავისუფლება, და რომელშიც ისინი იცხოვრებენ შიშისა და გაჭირვების გარეშე, გამოცხადებულია ადამიანთა მაღალ მისწრაფებად,
__label__ka სახელმწიფო ხელისუფლების წყარო ხალხის ნებაა; ეს ნება უნდა გამოიხატებოდეს პერიოდულ და გაუყალბებელ არჩევნებში, რომლებიც უნდა ტარდებოდეს საყოველთაო და თანასწორი საარჩევნო უფლების პირობებში, ფარული კენჭისყრით, ან სხვა თანაბარ მნიშვნელოვანი ფორმების მეშვეობით, რომლებიც უზრუნველყოფენ ხმის მიცემის თავისუფლებას.
__label__ka ყველა ადამიანს აქვს უფლება თავისუფლად მონაწილეობდეს საზოგადოების კულტურულ ცხოვრებაში, ტკბებოდეს ხელოვნებით, მონაწილეობდეს მეცნიერულ პროგრესში და სარგებლობდეს მისი სიკეთით.
__label__ka ვინაიდან, აუცილებელია, რომ ადამიანის უფლებებს იცავდეს კანონი, იმის უზრუნველსაყოფად, რათა ადამიანი იძულებული არ გახდეს მიმართოს აჯანყებას, როგორც ტირანიისა და ჩაგვრის წინააღმდეგ უკანასკნელ საშუალებას,
__label__ka ყველა დასაქმებულს აქვს უფლება იღებდეს სამართლიანსა და დამაკმაყოფილებელ გასამრჯელოს, რაც უზრუნველყოფს ღირსეულ ადამიანურ არსებობას, როგორც მისთვის, ასევე მისი ოჯახისათვის და რომელსაც, აუცილებლობის შემთხვევაში უნდა დაემატოს სოციალური უზრუნველყოფის სხვა სახსრები.
__label__ka ყველა ადამიანს, როგორც საზოგადოების წევრს, აქვს სოციალური უზრუნველყოფის უფლება და უფლება მოახდინოს თავისი ღირსების შენარჩუნება და პიროვნული თავისუფლების განვითარება ეკონომიკურ, სოციალურ და კულტურულ უფლებათა განხორციელებით ეროვნული ძალისხმევისა და საერთაშორისო თანამშრომლობის მეშვეობით და თითოეული სახელმწიფოს სტრუქტურისა და რესურსების შესაბამისად.
__label__ka ეს უფლება არ შეიძლება გამოყენებულ იქნეს ისეთი დევნის შემთხვევაში, რომლის საფუძველს ნამდვილად წარმოადგენს არაპოლიტიკური დანაშაულის ან ისეთი ქმედების ჩადენა, რომელიც ეწინააღმდეგება გაერთიანებული ერების ორგანიზაციის მიზნებსა და პრინციპებს.
__label__ka ამ ადამიანის უფლებათა საყოველთაო დეკლარაციას ისეთ ამოცანად, რომლის შესრულებას უნდა ესწრაფვოდეს ყველა ხალხი და ყველა სახელმწიფო, რათა ყოველი ადამიანი და საზოგადოების ყოველი ნაწილი ყოველთვის გაითვალისწინებს რა ამ დეკლარაციას, მიისწრაფვოდეს სწავლა-განათლების მეშვეობით ხელი შეუწყოს ამ უფლებათა და თავისუფლებათა პატივისცემას და მათი საყოველთაო და ეფექტიანი აღიარება-განხორციელების უზრუნველყოფას ეროვნული თუ საერთაშორისო პროგრესული ღონისძიებებით როგორც ორგანიზაციის წევრ სახელმწიფოთა, ასევე ამ სახელმწიფოების იურისდიქციას დაქვემდარებულ ტერიტორიათა ხალხებში.
__label__ka ყოველ ადამიანს აქვს უფლება აზრისა და გამოხატვის თავისუფლებისა. ეს უფლება მოიცავს ადამიანის თავისუფლებას დაუბრკოლებლად გამოთქვას საკუთარი აზრი და ყველანაირი საშუალებებით მოიძიოს, მიიღოს და გაავრცელოს ინფორმაცია და მოსაზრებები სახელმწიფო საზღვრებისაგან დამოუკიდებლად.
__label__ka არავის მიმართ არ შეიძლება თვითნებური ჩარევა მის პირადსა და ოჯახურ ცხოვრებაში, თვითნებური ხელყოფა მისი საცხოვრებელი ბინის ხელშეუხებლობის, მისი კორესპონდენციის საიდუმლოების ანდა მისი პატივისა და რეპუტაციისა. ყოველ ადამიანს აქვს უფლება დაცული იყოს კანონის მიერ ასეთი ჩარევისა თუ ხელყოფისაგან.
__label__ka ყოველ ადამიანს აქვს განათლების უფლება. განათლება დაწყებითი და ზოგადი მაინც, უფასო უნდა იყოს. დაწყებითი განათლება უნდა იყოს სავალდებულო. ტექნიკური და პროფესიული განათლება უნდა იყოს საყოველთაოდ ხელმისაწვდომი, უმაღლესი განათლება კი - ერთნაირად მისაწვდომი ყველასათვის თითოეულის უნარის შესაბამისად.
__label__ka ყოველ ადამიანს, მის უფლება-მოვალეობათა და მისთვის წაყენებული სისხლის სამართლებრივი ბრალდებათა საფუძვლიანობის განსაზღვროსათვის , სრული თანასწორობის საფუძველზე, უფლება აქვს, მისი საქმე საჯაროდ და სამართლიანობის ყველა მოთხოვნის დაცვით განიხილოს დამოუკიდებელმა და მიუკერძოებელმა სასამართლომ.
__label__ka ყოველი ადამიანი იბადება თავისუფალი და თანასწორი თავისი ღირსებითა და უფლებებით. მათ მინიჭებული აქვთ გონება და სინდისი და ერთმანეთის მიმართ უნდა ექცეოდნენ ძმობის სულისკვეთებით.
__label__ka ვინაიდან, წევრმა ქვეყნებმა იკისრეს ვალდებულება გაერთიანებული ერების ორგანიზაციასთან თანამშრომლობით ხელი შეუწყონ ადამიანის უფლებათა და ძირითად თავისუფლებათა საყოველთაო პატივისცემასა და დაცვას,
__label__ka ყოველ ადამიანს აქვს უფლება მშვიდობიანი შეკრებისა და გაერთიანების თავისუფლებისა.
__label__ka ყველა ადამიანს აქვს უფლება შესაბამისის ანაზღაურებისა ყოველგვარი დისკრიმინაციის გარეშე.
__label__ka არავის არ შეიძლება თვითნებურად ჩამოერთვას მოქალაქეობა ან თავისი მოქალაქეობის შეცვლის უფლება.
__label__ka ყოველ ადამიანს აქვს უფლება მონაწილეობდეს თავისი ქვეყნის მართვა-გამგეობაში უშუალოდ ან მის მიერ თავისუფლად არჩეულ წარმომადგენელთა მეშვეობით.
__label__ka არავინ შეიძლება დაექვემდებაროს თვითნებურ დაკავებას, დაპატიმრებას ან გაძევებას.
__label__ka ყველა ადამიანს აქვს უფლება ფლობდეს ქონებას, როგორც ერთპიროვნულად, ასევე სხვებთან ერთად.
__label__ka ყოველ ადამიანს, სადაც არ უნდა იმყოფებოდეს იგი, უფლება აქვს, რომ აღიარებულ იქნეს მისი სამართალსუბიექტობა.
__label__ka ყოველ ადამიანს უფლება აქვს დევნის საწინააღმდეგოდ სხვა ქვეყნებში ეძებოს და ისარგებლოს თავშესაფრით.
__label__ka დაუშვებელია, რომ ამ უფლებათა და თავისუფლებათა განხორციელება ეწინააღმდეგებოდეს გაერთიანებული ერების ორგანიზაციის მიზნებსა და პრინციპებს.
__label__ka ყოველ ადამიანს აქვს უფლება თანაბარ საფუძველზე შევიდეს თავისი ქვეყნის სახელმწიფო სამსახურში.
__label__ka ყველა ადამიანს აქვს მოვალეობანი საზოგადოების წინაშე, რადგან მხოლოდ საზოგადოებაშია შესაძლებელი მისი პიროვნების თავისუფალი და სრული განვითარება.
__label__ka ვინაიდან, ამ უფლებებისა და თავისუფლებების საყოველთაო გაგებას უდიდესი მნიშვნელობა აქვს ვალდებულებებისას მთლიანად შესრულებისათვის,
__label__ka არავინ შეიძლება აიძულონ შევიდეს რაიმე გაერთიანებაში.
__label__ka ოჯახი არის საზოგადოების ბუნებრივი და ძირითადი უჯრედი და მას უფლება აქვს დაცული იყოს საზოგადოებისა და სახელმწიფოს მხრიდან.
__label__ka არავინ არ უნდა იმყოფებოდეს მონობაში ან ძალმომრეობითი მორჩილების მდგომარეობაში. ყველა სახის მონობა და მონათვაჭრობა აკრძალულია.
__label__ka ყოველ ადამიანს აქვს თავისუფლად გადაადგილებისა და ცხოვრების უფლება ყოველი სახელმწიფოს ფარგლებში.
__label__ka დაქორწინება შესაძლებელია მხოლოდ ორივე მეუღლის თავისუფალი და სრული თანხმობის საფუძველზე.
__label__ka არავის მიმართ არ უნდა იქნეს გამოყენებული წამება ან სასტიკი, არაადამიანური, თუ მისი ღირსების დამამცირებელი მოპყრობა და სასჯელი.
__label__ka მშობლებს აქვთ უპირატესი უფლება აირჩიონ, თუ რა სახის განათლება სურთ თავიანთი შვილებისათვის.
__label__ka არავის უნდა ჩამოერთვას მისი ქონება თვითნებურად.
__label__ka ყოველ ადამიანს აქვს მოქალაქეობის უფლება.
__label__kek ¿Chan ru wankat?
__label__kek ¿K'aru tqaye?
__label__kek ¿Ma wan laj Tom?
__label__kek Laa'in xrab'in laj Tom.
__label__kek B'antiox re li Qaawa'.
__label__kek ¿Anihat laa'at?
__label__kek Tom lin k'ab'a'.
__label__kek ¿B'ar wan li tz'eqleb'aal?
__label__kek Laa'in ralalin laj Tom.
__label__kek ¡B'antiox!
__label__kek ¿Ani laa k'ab'a'?
__label__kek Ink'a' ninnaw.
__label__kek ¡Maajoq'e b'i'an!
__label__kek ¿B'ar wan li letrin?
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam naru naoken sa' li xb'aanuhom li tenamit, tirajsi ru rik'in ut taokeenq chi tenq'aank re xteenq'ankil ajwi' rib' rik'in li xna'leb' li tenamit.
__label__kek Xch'olob'ankil naq li Xch'uutamil li K'ila Tenamit sa' Ruchich'och' (Naciones Unidas) ak xe'xaqab' chi us sa' li xhuheb' li xwankilal ut li xloq'al li poyanam, li xjuntaq'eetil li wiinq rochb'en li ixq, ut xe'xke' xch'ool chi junajwa xwaklesinkil li tenamit re naq waanq xsahilal xyu'am ut twaanq sa' xyaalal;
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam taruuq tixk'a'uxla, tireek'a ut tixpaab' li k'a'ru traj; taruuq ajwi' tixjal li xpaab'aal malaq lix k'a'uxl, taruuq tixb'aanu li xpaab'aal malaq li xk'a'uxl, chi xjunesal ut sa' komonil, chiru tenamit malaq sa' muqmu, chi k'utb'il, chi b'aanunb'il malaq chi ilb'il.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam naru tajitoq chiru li chaq'rab' re naq takole'q xwankilal xloq'al wan sa' li Xnimal Ruhil Chaq'rab' jo' ajwi' sa' li k'ila chaq'rab'.
__label__kek Chijunil li usilal chaab'ilal wan sa' li Jultikahom a'in a'an re chijunil li poyanam, maak'a' naxye b'ar elajenaq, b'ar yo'lajenaq', chanru nailok, ma ixq ma wiinq, k'a'ru li raatinob'aal, li xpaab'aal, k'a'ru naxk'a'uxla chirix li awab'ejiink malaq k'a'ru chik chi na'leb'il, us ta b'ihom us ta neb'a', ut k'a'aq re ru chik.
__label__kek Maani tach'i'ch'i'iiq chi maak'a' xyaalal, jo' sa' xjunkab'al, sa' rochoch, malaq xtanql hu, malaq re xjob'al. Chijunil li poyanam naru tixkol rib' chiru li chaq'rab' wi yo chi ch'i'ch'i'iik chi jo'kan.
__label__kek Li xwaklesinkil ut li xtuqub'ankil ru li poyanam a'an li xk'anjel li tzolom, jo' ajwi' li xkawob'resinkil li roxloq'inkil li xloq'al xwankilal li poyanam ut li waank sa' xyaalal; tixteenq'a li k'amok ib' sa' usilal, li kuyuk maak ut li rahok ib' sa' xyaanqeb' chijunil li tenamit, xch'uutal tenamit ut li paab'aal; ut tixteenq'a xwaklesinkil xna'leb' li xch'uutal li k'ila tenamit sa' ruchich'och' re li usilal tuqtuukilal.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam kolb'ilaq li xyu'am, jo' ajwi' re li xjunkab'al, re naq kawaq ut sahaq sa' xch'ool, waanq xwa ruk'a', raq'ej, rochoch, ilb'ilaq sa' xyajel; kolb'ilaq rix wi taasachq xk'anjel, wi tayajeerq, wi tixtoch' rib', wi tajunataliiq, wi tatiixq, malaq k'a'aq chik re ru tixk'ul.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam q'ab'anb'il, naru xyeb'al naq maak'a' xmaak wi maji' natawman xmaak, chiru li chaq'rab' ut chiru li tenamit, ut b'ar wi' nak'utun naq xteenq'aak chi us chi xkolb'al rib'.
__label__kek Xch'olob'ankil naq li k'ila tenamit ch'utch'uukeb' sa' ruchich'och xe'xye naq te'xkol rix li xwankil ut li xloq'al li poyanam sa' chijunil li ruchich'och', ut
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam chaab'il tojb'ilaq re naq wanq rochb'en li xjunkab'al sa' xyaalal, kama' naraj li xloq'al xwankilal. Jual us wi naru xk'ub'ankil chic b'ayaq ru.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam juntaq'eet wankil xloq'al naq nake'yo'la, ut kama' ak reheb' naq wan xna'leb'eb ut nake'reek'a rib', tento naq te'xk'am rib' sa' usilal chirib'ilrib'eb'.
__label__kek Maani taruuq taasik'oq sa' li Jultikahom a'in, k'a'ru xb'aanunkil re xjeb'al ru li loq'al wankilal, usilal chaab'ilal xaqab'anb'il sa' li Jultikahom a'in.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam naru tixye li k'a'ru nak'ulun sa' xch'ool; ink'a' naru tach'i'ch'i'iiq xb'aan a'an, taruuq tixsik', tixk'ul li k'ila na'leb' ut tarisi resil yalaq b'ar.
__label__kek Li loq'al wankilal, chaab'ilal usilal a'in maajunsut truuq oksimmanq wi ink'a' junaj ru rik'in li xna'leb' ut li xyehom li Xch'uutal li K'ila Tenamit sa' ruchich'ch'.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam naru taa'ab'iiq sa' juntaq'eetil ut chiru tenamit, xb'aan junaq li raqob'aal aatin ak a'an xk'anjel xaqxooq wi', re naq tasik'e'q chanru wan chiru li chaq'rab' malaq k'a'ut naq yo chi q'ab'aak.
__label__kek Maani tak'eheq chi toje'k xmaak wi li xb'anuhom malaq ink'a' xb'anuhom, moko maak ta chiru li charq'rab' naq xk'ulman. Jo'kan ajwi' ink'a' naru xk'eb'al xtz'aqob' xtojb'al xmaak wi' maawa' a'an wan sa' li chaq'rab' naq xmaako'.
__label__kek Juntaq'eeteb' chijunil li poyanam chiru li chaq'rab' ut juntaq'eet ajwi' naq kolb'ilaqeb' chiru. Junta'eet naq kolb'ilaqeb' wi te'raj ch'e'e'k chiru li usilal chaab'ilal wan chisa' li Jultikahom a'in.
__label__kek Li k'a'ru naraj li tenamit a'an li nataqlan sa' xb'een li xb'aanuhom li awab'ejilal; aran nak'utun naq nawan li sik'ok u, ab'an tento xb'aanunkil naq naxtaw xq'ehil, te'okeenq chijunil ut sa' muqmu re naq yaal re li tenamit ani tixxaqab'.
__label__kek Xch'olob'ankil naq makach'in li raylal nak'ulman sa' ruchich'och' xb'aan naq maak'a' nake'raj re ut xik' nake'ril li xwankilal li xloq'al li poyanam, ut jo'kan naq xxaqab'aman kama' li jual aajel ru chiru li poyaman li xx'ub'ankil ru li ruchich'och' b'ar wi' li poyanam ink'a' te'xuwa rib' ut ink'a' sub'suqeb' sa' neb'a'il, re naq chi jo'kan sa naq te'aatinaq ut sa naq te'xpaab' li k'a'ru te'raj;
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam kolb'ilaq rix ut teenq'anb'ilaq, li xtenamitul ut li xteenq li ab'l tenamit tento naq te'xsik' xyaalal xteenq'ankil, kama' naraj xloq'al xwankilal re naq sa wanq.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam naru natzolok. Li tzolom tento naq wanq chi siib'il us ta ka'aj wi' li xtikib'ankil. Li xtikib'ankil tento xb'aanunkil. Li xkomon chijunil te'ruuq te'okeenq chirix.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam yalaq b'ar taaruuq tab'eeq ut yaal re k'a'ru tenamitul takanaaq wi' chi waank.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam naru nak'anjelak, naru tixsik' ru xk'anjel, chaab'il k'anjel ut kolb'ilaq re naq junelik waanq xk'anjel.
__label__kek Li na'b'ej yuwa'b'ej naru te'xsik' ru li xtzolomeb' li ral xk'ajol.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam kolb'ilaq rix, jo' li xyu'am jo' li xwanjinik sa' xyaalal.
__label__kek Maajun li poyanam tireechani ta junaq chik li poyanam malaq tixtawasi ta rik'in kawil k'anjel. A'in ramb'il tz'aqal chiru li chaq'rab'.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam wan xb'aanuhom chiru li xtenamit, xb'aan naq ka'aj wi' aran truuq tz'aqal chi waklesinkil rib'.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam naru nahilan, tirajsi ru naq maak'a'aq xk'anjel, tz'aqalaq ru li xkutan ut tojb'ilaq naq tahilaanq.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam naru twaanq k'a'aq ru re, chi xjunesalil ut sa' komanil.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam naru naxyoob' xch'uut ut naru naok sa' ch'uut re xkolb'al rix li xk'anjel.
__label__kek Re chijunil li poyanam li usilal naq sa' chijunil li ruchich'och' chi paab'aaq ta li loq'al wankilal xjultikaman arin.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam naru tixch'utub' rib' ut tixyoob' xch'utam chi tuqtuukilal.
__label__kek Wi yo chi sik'e'k junaq li poyanam naru tixkol rib' sa' junaq chik tenamit.
__label__kek Maani taaruuq tatawasiiq, tak'eheq chi toje'k xmaak malaq tasak'e'q chi yo'on malaq takub'siiq xwankil xpoyanamil.
__label__kek Maani taruuq taisiiq chiru li xtenamitul, jo' ajwi' li xjalb'al wi jo'kan traj.
__label__kek Xch'olob'ankil naq tento ajwi' xwaklesinkil li k'amok ib' sa' usilal sa' xyaanqeb' li k'ila tenamit sa' ruchich'och';
__label__kek Jo'kan ajwi' maak'a' naxye chanru wan li tenamit b'ar wi' chaljenaq wi'.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam juntaq'eetaq xtojb'al naq juntaq'eet k'anjel xb'aanu.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam naru taakole'q chiru chijunil li k'a'aq re ru xb'aanuhom.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam naru naoken sa' x'awab'ejilal li xtenamit, a'anaq ajwi' malaq yal tixsik' ruuchil.
__label__kek Xch'olob'ankil naq aajel ru naq juntaq'eet chi tawmaanq ru li na'leb' xyeeman arin, re naq chi tz'aqatz'aqal tauxmaanq;
__label__kek Xch'olob'ankil naq tento kolb'ilaq sa' li chaq'rab' li xwankilal ut li xloq'al li poyanam, re naq ink'a' taawakliiq chi xkolb'al rix sa' josq'il;
__label__kek Maani tamaq'e'q li k'a'aq ru re chiru chi maak'a'aq xyaalal.
__label__kek Chijunil li poyanam naru twanq xtenamitul.
__label__kek Maani tamine'q chiru waank sa' junaq ch'utam.
__label__fuf NEDDHO KALA NO HANDI TAWEEDE KA ARDAGOL HAADYUUDYI LEYDI MUN, WONI KANKO TIGI; MAA BHE O SUBHII LONTO.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤭𞤼𞤭𞤪𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤫 𞤳𞤢𞥄𞤴𞤭𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤶𞤭 𞤻𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤯𞤭.
__label__fuf GOOTO NYAAWITIRTAAKE DAWLA MAA SARIYA LEYDI MUUN, WONI HETTIINDI MAA LAAMAANDI.
__label__fuf E BATTE SONDYAA, NEDDHO KALA NO HAANI DHABEHUDE KA FATTO. SARIYA NO YAANANI MO HEBHUGOL FATTANNDE E LEYDHE GOO.
__label__fuf SARIYA NO YAANANI NEDDHO KALA IWUGOLE LEYDI, HAY SI KO LEYDI MAKKO, MAA ARTUGOL KA MUN.
__label__fuf 𞤖𞤢𞤴 𞤺𞤮𞥅𞤼𞤮 𞤬𞤮𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤭 𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤲𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤶𞤫𞤴𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤬𞤫𞤣𞥆𞤫 𞤢𞤤𞤢𞤴 𞤧𞤢𞤺𞤮.
__label__fuf 𞤍𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤫 𞤲'𞤺𞤵𞥅 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵𞤐'𞤦𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤢 𞤣𞤢𞤻𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤣𞤮𞤱 𞤤𞤵𞥅𞤲𞤣𞤢𞥄𞤪𞤫 𞤨𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤣𞤢𞥄𞤤𞤫𞥅 𞤥𞤵𞥅𞤴𞤢𞥄𞤦𞤫 𞤣𞤮𞤱𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤶𞤭 𞤣𞤫𞤲𞤼𞤵𞤯𞤭.
__label__fuf MO KALA NO HANDI DANDANEEDE NAFAADYI HUMIIDHI E GANDAL, NYEENYAL, WALLIFOODYI E FIDYINDAARUUDYI DHI O SINTYI.
__label__fuf 𞤋𞤲𞥆𞤢𞤥𞤢 𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫𞥅 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤵𞤶𞥆𞤢𞥄𞤶𞤭 𞤬𞤢𞤴𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤪𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤮 𞤲'𞤺𞤮 𞤲'𞤺𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤵𞤯𞤢𞥄𞤳𞤮 𞤩𞤢𞤥𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤪𞤫 𞤸𞤵𞥅𞤩𞤼𞤭𞤣𞤭𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤢𞤲𞤳𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤢𞤤 𞤥𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤮 𞤼𞤢𞤲 𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤭 𞤱𞤮𞥅𞤼𞤣𞤫.
__label__fuf NEDDHO KALA NO HANNDI E FOWTAARE, E WELTINAARE, TENTINI SAA A GOLLE EBBHIRADHO NO HAWRIRI, E GURTE YOBHETEEDHE.
__label__fuf KALA NEDDHO FAWAADHO KUUGAL BONNGAL, DYOGITORTAAKE HAA TABITA E HAGHIIGHA E DOW NYAAWANNDE BATTE BONNERE MAKKO E DOW SEEDEEDYI MAKKO FOW.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤴𞤢𞤸𞤣𞤫 𞤯𞤮 𞤱𞤫𞤤𞤢𞥄 𞤬𞤮𞤬 𞤫 𞤲𞤮 𞤱𞤫𞤤𞤭𞤪𞤢𞥄 𞤬𞤮𞤬 𞤳𞤢𞤥 𞤧𞤵𞤩𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤸𞤮𞤯𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞤪 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭.
__label__fuf SARIYA NO YAANANI NEDDHO KALA YIILAGOL, SUBHOO NO FAALIRAA KA HODHA E LEYDI WO.
__label__fuf NEDDHO KALA NO HANDI E TAWDEEDE E KAWTITAL KA BHANTAL GANDE, O NAFTORA NYEENYAL E MOYYLSREEDYI KO HUMII E DHUN.
__label__fuf 𞤉 𞤼𞤵𞥅𞤺𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤼𞤫𞤲𞤼𞤭 𞤲'𞤣𞤫 𞤩𞤢𞤥𞤼𞤢𞤼𞤮𞥅 𞤩𞤭𞤴𞤲𞤺𞤵 𞤴𞤵𞤥𞥆𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤵𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤯𞤫𞥅𞤤𞤫 𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤯 𞤵𞤯𞤫،
__label__fuf MAWBHE BHEN NO HAANI ADO FOW SUBHAADE NOONE NEEDI NDI BHE FAALANNA BHIBBHE MABBHE BHEN.
__label__fuf 𞤉 𞤧𞤢𞤸𞤢𞥄 𞤳𞤵𞤤𞤮𞤤، 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤰𞤫𞥅𞤱𞤣𞤫 𞤥𞤮𞥅𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤪𞤫 𞤫 𞤣𞤢𞤻𞤣𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤥𞤮𞥅𞤤𞤲𞤣𞤭 𞤯𞤵𞤥 𞤫 𞤺𞤮𞤯𞥆𞤫 𞤯𞤫𞥅.
__label__fuf TAWEEDE, SINAA E LEYDI TEDDIN NDI HANDANDHI NEDDHO, AADEN TAWAY, SI O HEBHAY FAABO, BEE SI O MURTAN NDYAGGU E BHITTAARE;
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤴𞤢𞤤𞤼𞤵𞤣𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤸𞤢𞤴 𞤧𞤮 𞤼𞤢𞤱𞤭𞥅 𞤳𞤮 𞤲'𞤣𞤭 𞤥𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤥 𞤫 𞤢𞤪𞤼𞤵𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤥𞤵𞤥.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤢𞤪𞤣𞤭𞤲𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤻𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤺𞤫𞤯𞤫/𞤺𞤮𞤤𞥆𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤫 𞤣𞤮𞤱 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤢𞤤.
__label__fuf TAWEEDE KO HEBHBHITANNDE FOTTANAANDE E DHII HANDIIDYI E NDEE HETTAARE BHURI KELDHUDE E FII HUNNUGOL NDII AHADI; DENTAL NGAL FENNYINI:
__label__fuf 𞤖𞤢𞤴 𞤺𞤮𞥅𞤼𞤮 𞤬𞤮𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤭 𞤲𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤺𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤧𞤮𞤳𞤫𞥅 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤴𞤢𞤤𞤼𞤭𞤲𞤫𞥅 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤼𞤢𞤱𞤢 𞤳𞤮 𞤫 𞤣𞤮𞤱𞤐'𞤦𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤳𞤢 𞤫 𞤦𞤫𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤯𞤫.
__label__fuf KO BHEYNGUTJBE WONI MANNGAL DYAMAA ON; NO HAANI KA ON DYAMAA E LAAMU NGUN, DANNDA BHEYNGUURE KALA.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞥅𞤲𞤳𞤢 𞤥𞤵𞥅𞤴𞤢𞥄𞤯𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤼𞤮 𞤦𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤺𞤫 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤢𞤲𞤳𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤢𞤤 𞤫 𞤶𞤢𞤱𞤯𞤭 𞤼𞤵𞥅𞤺𞤭𞥅𞤯𞤫 𞤫 𞤩𞤵𞤤𞤺𞤮 𞤺𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤢𞤤، 𞤷𞤮𞤻𞤷𞤫، 𞤻𞤫𞥅𞤻𞤢𞤤 𞤯𞤫 𞤮 𞤼𞤢𞤬𞤭.
__label__fuf GOOTO GASIRTAAKE NANGIREEDE NII TUN, DYOGEE, RADHEE KA LEYDI MUN.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵 𞤱𞤢𞤯𞤣𞤫 𞤦𞤢𞤼𞤵 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤬𞤫𞤣𞥆𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫 𞤱𞤮𞤲𞤢𞥄 𞤬𞤭𞤼𞤭𞤲𞤢.
__label__fuf 𞤑𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤣𞤫𞤲𞤼𞤢𞤤 𞤴𞤭𞤥𞤩 𞤫 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤫 𞤶𞤫𞤴𞤢𞤤 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭.
__label__fuf GOOTO DYOGORTAAKE MATTYANGAAKU, KURKAADUYAAGAL E NGEYNGU YIMBHE.
__label__fuf NEDDHO KALA NO HANNDI E TIMBUDUGOL E WOBBHE "SENIDIKA", MAA TAWTUGOL "SENDIKA" FII DANDUGOL NAFAADYI MAKKO.
__label__fuf GOOTO TUDHETAAKE E LETTE, TAMPERE, YANNGI MAA E KUUDHE WIRTAYDHE.
__label__fuf BHEYNGU E KETTYO NO HANDI E BALLAL E TAMBITAL FEEREWAL. DYIBINAABHE FOW, WONI E DEWGAL MAA WONI, NO FOTA HANNDUDE E DANDEEDE.
__label__fuf DHIN HANDANDHI E NDEN HETTAARE GASETAAKE NO WONIRI WOO, HUUTORIREEDE E NDER LURRAL TUUGANDHE SARIYAADYI POTTAL LEYDHE ADUNA DHEN.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤤𞤭𞤺𞥆𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤣𞤮𞤱 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤢𞤤 𞤸𞤵𞤶𞥆𞤭𞤢𞥄𞤶𞤭 𞤤𞤭𞤺𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤴 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞥅𞤲𞤳𞤢 𞤦𞤢𞥄𞤧𞤺𞤮𞤤 𞤺𞤮𞤤𞥆𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫.
__label__fuf NEDDHO KALA NO HANDIE ANNUYEE MOTTONDIRAL MAA KAWTITAL E NDER BHUTTU.
__label__fuf 𞤖𞤢𞤴 𞤺𞤮𞥅𞤼𞤮 𞤬𞤮𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤭 𞤫 𞤢𞤥𞤣𞤵 𞤫 𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤣𞤫 𞤸𞤢𞤯𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤶𞤫𞤴𞤭 𞤥𞤵𞤥.
__label__fuf TAWEEDE, TAMBITAGOL SEMBINA WELDIGALE HUUWONDIRAL E HAKKUNDE LEYDHE KO HAGHIIGHA;
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤭 𞤫 𞤧𞤢𞤺𞤮 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤶𞤫𞤴𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤩𞤢𞤥𞤼𞤵𞤺𞤮𞤤 𞤨𞤭𞤲𞤢𞤤 𞤪𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥، 𞤸𞤵𞥅𞤼𞤮𞤪𞤮𞥅 𞤻𞤫𞥅𞤻𞤫 𞤫 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤭𞤼𞤣𞤫 𞤩𞤢𞤥𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤪𞤫 𞤺𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤢𞤤𞤭𞤴𞤢𞤲𞤳𞤫𞥅𞤱𞤢𞤤 𞤫 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤩𞤵𞤪𞤫 𞤶𞤢𞤤𞤼𞤮𞥅𞤶𞤫 𞤸𞤫𞥅𞤲.
__label__fuf NEDDHO KALA NO HANDI E HALAL, WONI KANKO TUN, MAA E NDER KAWTITAL.
__label__fuf KALA NO HANNDI ANDITANEEDE NOKKU FOW NDIMANKAAKU MUN.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤶𞤫𞤴𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭، 𞤱𞤮𞤲𞤭 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤲'𞤺𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤭.
__label__fuf NEDDHO KALA NO HANDI E DOW SARTIIDYI FOTOYDHI, HEWTUGOL MAGHAAMUUDYI HAWTAADHI KA LEYDI MAKKO.
__label__fuf 𞤔𞤭𞤦𞤭𞤲𞤢𞥄𞤩𞤫 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤭 𞤧𞤵𞤩𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤸𞤮𞤤 𞤬𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤵 𞤶𞤢ŋ𞤣𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤮𞤳𞥆𞤢𞤼𞤢 𞤧𞤵𞤳𞥆𞤢𞥄𞤩𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥𞤫𞤲.
__label__fuf KALA TOONYAADHO NO HANNDI E WULLITAGOL KA TYUUDHI SARIYA LEYDI MUN.
__label__fuf 𞤩𞤫𞤧𞤲𞤺𞤮 𞤳𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤥 𞤱𞤮𞤲𞤭 𞤼𞤫𞤪𞤺𞤢𞤤 𞤺𞤢𞤣𞤢𞤲𞤢𞤤 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞤪 𞤪𞤫𞤲𞤣𞤮 𞤩𞤫𞤧𞤲𞤺𞤵 𞤭𞤲𞤢𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞥅𞤲𞤳𞤢 𞤭𞤥𞥆𞤮𞤪𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤪𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤥 𞤫 𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤥𞤵 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞥅.
__label__fuf DESAL FOTTANAAMA WOO E HOORE FAALE E AYYINANNDE YHETTINDIRAYBHE BHEN.
__label__fuf GOOTO HANDAA E DOOLEEDE INNORDE LEYDI MUN, MAA ITTITSE INNORDE LEYDI.
__label__fuf 𞤌𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤲𞤮𞥅𞤲 𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤢𞥄 𞤬𞤢𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤱𞤢𞤪𞤣𞤫 𞤸𞤮𞥅𞤪𞤫 𞤣𞤮𞤺𞤢 𞤰𞤫𞥅𞤱𞤢 𞤥𞤮𞥅𞤤𞤯𞤮 𞤯𞤵𞤥، 𞤮 𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤭 𞤬𞤢𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤼𞤢𞤲 𞤳𞤮 𞤫 𞤶𞤢𞤥𞤭𞤪𞤮𞥅𞤶𞤫 𞤬𞤫𞤣𞥆𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤯𞤫𞥅𞤤𞤫 𞤣𞤫𞤲𞤼𞤵𞤯𞤫.
__label__fuf 𞤋𞤲𞥆𞤢𞤥𞤢 𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫𞥅 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤱𞤵𞥅𞤪𞤣𞤫، 𞤫 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞥆𞤢𞤺𞤵 𞤳𞤢𞤥 𞤫 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞥅𞤲𞤳𞤢 𞤫 𞤳𞤭𞤧𞤢𞤤 𞤸𞤮𞥅𞤪𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥.
__label__fuf NEDDHO KAL NO HANDANI YO NYIIBHA, TELEMMA KA HUUWONDIRAL E KA LAALAGOL ADUNA, YAASI MO TAWETEE, HANDANDHI E HETTAAREEDYI YAMIRAADHI E NDEE DYANTOORE NO BHANAGIRI KO HEEWI.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤥𞤭𞥅𞤶𞤮 𞤫 𞤧𞤢𞥄𞤳𞤼𞤵𞤣𞤫 𞤥𞤭𞥅𞤶𞤮 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤯𞤵𞤥 𞤬𞤭𞤪𞤼𞤭 𞤳𞤮 𞤶𞤮𞥅𞤥 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤬𞤮𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤥𞤭 𞤸𞤵𞤤𞤣𞤫 𞤬𞤫𞥅𞤻𞤲𞤭𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤥𞤭𞥅𞤶𞤮 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤱𞤭𞤯𞤼𞤵𞤣𞤫، 𞤸𞤫𞤩𞤣𞤫 𞤳𞤢𞤥 𞤫 𞤧𞤢𞤪𞤣𞤫 𞤥𞤭𞥅𞤶𞤮𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤫 𞤳𞤢𞤦𞤢𞤾𞤵𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤼𞤢𞤱𞤢 𞤱𞤮𞤰𞤢𞥄𞤳𞤭 𞤳𞤫𞥅𞤪𞤭 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤵𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤯𞤫𞥅𞤤𞤫 𞤫 𞤲𞤮 𞤧𞤢𞤪𞤣𞤢𞥄 𞤬𞤮𞤬.
__label__fuf 𞤉 𞤼𞤵𞥅𞤺𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤩𞤵𞤤𞤲𞤺𞤮 𞤪𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤲'𞤺𞤢𞤥 𞤼𞤢𞤬𞤣𞤫 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫𞥅 𞤳𞤢𞤥 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵، 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤯𞤫𞥅𞤤𞤫 𞤯𞤫𞥅 𞤼𞤫𞤲𞤼𞤭𞤲𞤭𞥅 𞤲𞤢𞤬𞤮𞥅𞤪𞤫 𞤩𞤵𞤪𞤼𞤵𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤱𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤨𞤫𞤤𞥆𞤭𞤼𞤺𞤮𞤤، 𞤳𞤮 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞥅𞤲 𞤦𞤢𞤼𞤵 𞤲'𞤺𞤵𞥅 𞤲𞤢𞤲𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤭𞤪𞤭، 𞤸𞤮𞤤𞥆𞤭𞤼𞤭:
__label__fuf TAWEEDE LAAMATEERIIDYI WONDHI E ADUNA ON, TAWAADHI KA SUUSEETI ADUNAYANKEEDYO DYAMMAADHO "ONI" YHETTIL AHADI WONDEMA E NDER HUUWONDIRAL MADDYI E NGA AL DENTAL LEYDHE DHI HUUTORAY PEHE DHEN FOW FII NO ANDIREE, DHOFTEE HANDANDHI NEDDHANKE E HETTAARE TAATAGIIRE MAKKO;
__label__fuf NEDDHO KALA NO HANDI E ANNUYEE MIIDYO MUN, FAAMU E DIINA. NDIN HANDI WONI SABU RUTTANDE, SILMOL, BHANGINGOL DIINA MA FELLITAL MUN, WONI E KENE MAA GUNDOO, E DOW BALLAL DYANDE, KUUDHE, DEWAL, MAA DYOKKUDS NAAMUUDYI.
__label__fuf TAWEEDE NDELO HETTAARE, NUNDHAL E BHUTTU ADUNAAN KO ANNDUDE WONDE NDIMU HERTINAAGU NEDDHANKE EN FOW E HANDANDHI BHE DHIN, KO PLIDYI Dhi BONTATAA, DHI BHE FOTATA E MUN;
__label__fuf 𞤘𞤮𞥅𞤼𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤭 𞤸𞤮𞤳𞥆𞤵𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤸𞤮𞥅𞤪𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤢 𞤺𞤵𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤳𞤢𞥄𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤯𞤭 𞤫 𞤲𞤢𞤲𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤭𞤪𞤢𞤤𞤲𞤺𞤢𞤤 𞤼𞤢𞤱𞤢 𞤢𞤤𞤢𞥄 𞤨𞤢𞤤𞤼𞤢𞤺𞤮𞤤 𞤲'𞤺𞤵𞤪𞤵،𞤐'𞤦𞤢𞤴𞤣𞤭، 𞤤𞤫𞤻𞤮𞤤، 𞤯𞤫𞤥𞤲𞤺𞤢𞤤، 𞤣𞤭𞥅𞤲𞤫، 𞤭𞤱𞤣𞤭 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤪𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤮، 𞤣𞤢𞤻𞤢𞤤، 𞤶𞤭𞤦𞤭𞤲𞤢𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤲'𞤺𞤮𞤲𞤳𞤢.
__label__fuf GOOTO FAWNYETAATE E GUNNDO NGURNDAN MUN, KA BHEYNGUURE MUN, KA GOLLE MUN, MAA KA HUUWONDIRE MUN, NAA FERE O HOYNEE MAA O DYINSE DYAAHU. SARIYA NO HAANI NDANNDUDE NEDDHO KALA DHII FAWNYEREEDYI.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤫 𞤶𞤫𞤴𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤼𞤫𞤪𞤯𞤫 𞤺𞤢𞤪𞤣𞤭𞥅𞤯𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤥𞤵𞤥. 𞤚𞤢𞤱𞤢 𞤳𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤻𞤵𞤥 𞤫 𞤸𞤮𞥅𞤪𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤼𞤢𞤱𞤢 𞤳𞤮 𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤦𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤩𞤫 𞤴𞤭𞤥𞤩𞤫 𞤫 𞤷𞤵𞤩𞤭𞥅 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤲'𞤶𞤮𞥅𞤯 𞤢𞤻𞤭𞥅 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤧𞤢𞤦𞤵 𞤶𞤮𞤻𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤺𞤫𞤯𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥.
__label__fuf 𞤉 𞤼𞤵𞥅𞤺𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤲𞤢𞤲𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤭𞤪𞤢𞤤 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤯𞤫𞥅𞤤𞤫 𞤷𞤢𞥄𞤳𞤼𞤢𞤲𞤺𞤢𞤤 𞤱𞤮𞥅𞤲𞤣𞤮𞥅𞤪𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤯𞤫𞥅𞤤𞤫 𞤶𞤮𞤱𞤭𞤼𞤭𞥅𞤯𞤫 𞤫 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤺𞤢𞤣𞤢𞤲𞤭 𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫𞥅 𞤦𞤢𞤴𞤯𞤭 𞤲𞤮 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵، 𞤼𞤫𞤣𞥆𞤵𞤲𞤺𞤢𞤤 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞤪 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤢𞤤 𞤪𞤫𞤱𞤩𞤫 𞤫 𞤱𞤮𞤪𞤩𞤫. 𞤂𞤫𞤴𞤯𞤫𞥅𞤤𞤫 𞤯𞤫𞥅 𞤳𞤮𞤣𞥆𞤭𞤪𞤭𞥅 𞤫 𞤣𞤢𞤪𞤢𞤲𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤩𞤢𞤥𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤪𞤫 𞤪𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤮 𞤫 𞤻𞤭𞤩𞤺𞤮𞤤 𞤬𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤵𞤶𞤭 𞤲'𞤺𞤵𞥅𞤪𞤲𞤣𞤢𞤥 𞤥𞤮𞤰𞥆𞤢𞤥،
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤶𞤢ŋ𞤣𞤫 𞤶𞤢ŋ𞤣𞤫 𞤬𞤮𞤼𞤭 𞤱𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤳𞤮 𞤲'𞤣𞤫 𞤢𞤤𞤢𞥄 𞤲'𞤶𞤮𞤩𞤣𞤭 𞤸𞤢𞤴 𞤧𞤭𞤲𞥆𞤢 𞤳𞤮 𞤼𞤮 𞤢𞤪𞤱𞤢𞤲𞤭𞥅𞤪𞤫 𞤫 𞤺𞤢𞤣𞤢𞤲𞤢𞤤. 𞤔𞤢ŋ𞤣𞤫 𞤧𞤵𞤳𞤢𞥄𞤩𞤫 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤬𞤮𞤼𞤭 𞤱𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤢𞤤𞤢𞤴 𞤧𞤢𞤺𞤮. 𞤔𞤢ŋ𞤣𞤫 𞤳𞤢𞤪𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤢𞤤 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤬𞤮𞤼𞤭 𞤸𞤵𞤩𞤼𞤭𞤣𞤭𞤲’𞤣𞤫: 𞤶𞤢ŋ𞤣𞤫 𞤼𞤮𞥅𞤱𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤬𞤮𞤼𞤭 𞤵𞤣𞥆𞤭𞤼𞤢𞤲𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤥𞤮𞤲𞤭 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤼𞤢𞤱 𞤢𞤤𞤢𞥄 𞤸𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤭-𞤸𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤢، 𞤼𞤢𞤱𞤢 𞤳𞤮 𞤫 𞤦𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤢𞤤 𞤥𞤵𞤥.
__label__fuf YETTUDE KA HELLIFAL, DEBBO E GORKO NO HANDI E DEWGAL, KEBHAL BHEYNGUURE DHUN REWAA LENYOL, IWDI MAA DIINA. IBHE DYOGII HANNDIIDYI FOTAYBHI HELLA KA DESAL, WONI KA WONNDIIGAL, MAA SEEBIGAL.
__label__fuf 𞤒𞤭𞤥𞤩𞤫 𞤬𞤮𞤬 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤭 𞤫 𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤥𞤵 𞤫𞤼𞤫 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤭 𞤬𞤮𞤼𞤣𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞥅𞤲𞤣𞤳𞤢 𞤫 𞤴𞤫𞥅𞤧𞤮 𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤥𞤵. 𞤒𞤭𞤥𞤩𞤫 𞤬𞤮𞤬 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤭 𞤬𞤮𞤼𞤲𞤣𞤫𞥅𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤪𞤫𞥅𞤲𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤸𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤭 𞤸𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤭 𞤦𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤯𞤮 𞤴𞤢𞤩𞥆𞤵𞤣𞤫 𞤳𞤵𞤤𞤫 𞤲'𞤺𞤢𞤤 𞤲𞤢𞤲𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤭𞤪𞤢𞤤 𞤴𞤭𞤥𞤩𞤫 𞤬𞤮𞤬𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤭 𞤪𞤫𞥅𞤲𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤼𞤮𞥅𞤻𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤺𞤫 𞤼𞤢𞤱𞤢 𞤢𞤤𞤢𞥄 𞤨𞤢𞤤𞤼𞤮𞥅𞤪.
__label__fuf KALA GOLLUDHO NO HANNDI E DYODDI KELDHUNDI, GASAYNDIMO WURNIDUDE E BEEYNGUURE MAKKO E NDER LIIMAANU, WALLITTOREE KADI SI NO HAANI, PEHE GOO SOLLINTINAYDHE NGURDAN.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤱𞤵𞤤𞥆𞤭𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤻𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤮𞥅𞤪𞤫 𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤧𞤮 𞤼𞤢𞤱𞤭𞥅 𞤮 𞤺𞤢𞤻𞤢𞥄𞤥𞤢، 𞤮 𞤼𞤮𞥅𞤻𞤢𞥄𞤥𞤢 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤧𞤮 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤥𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤮 𞤲'𞤶𞤮𞥅𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤥𞤢. 𞤯𞤭𞥅𞤲 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤲'𞤺𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤥𞤵 𞤫 𞤻𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤮𞥅𞤶𞤫.
__label__fuf 𞤉 𞤼𞤵𞥅𞤺𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤱𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤼𞤫𞤲𞤼𞤭 𞤴𞤮 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫𞥅 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞥅𞤲𞤭𞤪𞤫 𞤴𞤢𞤥𞤭𞤪𞤮𞥅𞤪𞤫 𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤯𞤭𞤲𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤲'𞤦𞤫𞤤𞤫 𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫𞥅 𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤧𞤢𞥄 𞤼𞤮𞤲𞥆𞤺𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤺𞤵𞤤𞥆𞤭𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤮𞤤 𞤣𞤮𞤱𞤪𞤮𞤱𞤮𞤤 𞤧𞤮 𞤼𞤢𞤱𞤭𞥅 𞤬𞤢𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤥𞤢 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤬𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤣𞤭 𞤳𞤭𞥅𞤧𞤲𞤣𞤭 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤲𞤫𞤪𞤫 𞤩 𞤵𞤪𞤼𞤵𞤲𞤣𞤫،
__label__fuf MO KALA NO WAAWI TIPPUDE E DHII SARTIIDYI NDII AHADI, DHUN NON REWAA LENYOL, MBAADI BHANNDU, NOONE AWRA, NOONE DHENGAL, DIINA MAA DAWLA WOO; DHUN REWA NGALU, DYIBBIANDE MAA KALA KO NANDI E DHUN.
__label__fuf 𞤉 𞤳𞤮 𞤬𞤢𞤱𞤼𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤫𞥅𞤲 𞤸𞤢𞤴 𞤨𞤢𞤤𞤼𞤮𞥅𞤪 𞤺𞤮𞥅𞤼𞤮 𞤱𞤮𞥅𞤣𞤢𞤼𞤢𞥄 𞤫 𞤣𞤮𞤱 𞤴𞤮𞤱𞤭𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤣𞤢𞤱𞤪𞤵𞤺𞤮𞤤، 𞤻𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤮𞥅𞤪𞤫 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤵𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤯𞤫𞥅𞤤𞤫 𞤬𞤢𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤵𞤥𞥆𞤭𞥅𞤯𞤮 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤥𞤮 𞤴𞤮𞤱𞤭𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤳𞤭 𞤥𞤢𞥄 𞤱𞤮𞤲𞤭 𞤨𞤢𞤱𞤭𞤯𞤮 𞤴𞤢𞤥𞤭𞤪𞤮𞥅𞤪𞤫 𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤯𞤭𞤲𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤱𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤬𞤮𞤬.
__label__fuf NEDDHANKE EN FOW DYIBINTE NO HETTII NO FOTA E DHI FOW, E NDIMU E HANDANDHI. BHE DYIBINDINTE E HAGGHIL E FAAMU ; HIBHE HAANI DYOGONDIRDE E NDER HAGGHIL NEENEGOOTAANKAAKU.
__label__fuf NDEE DYANTOORE ADUNA FII E DHI NEDDHANKE HANDI, KO NDEE FAANDAARE T IMMUNDE, NDE DYAMAADYI E LEYDHE KALA TUNGANII FII YO YIMBHE BHEN E, HUUWONDIRE MABBHE DHEN, ANNDUDHE, ANNDITI E NEEDI FII TABINTINTGOL HAA HUUBHITA, DHOFTAARE DHIN HANDANDHI NEDDHO E HETTAARE MAXO. BHE WAAWA SIIWUDE E DHUN, PEHE MOYYHE, EBBHITIRA DHE NO HAANIRI E LEYDI BEE, HAA HUUBHITA ADUNA ON, FII NO ANNDITIREE, FALTANEE HAA HUUTOREE NO HAANIRI, NOKKU WOONOKKU, DHIN SARIYAADYI DHOO, WONI KA DYAMAADYI FEYDHE TAWAADEE KA SUUSEETI ADUNAI MAA KA DYAMAADYI LEYDHE, DHE DHEN LEYDHE LAAMII.
__label__fuf 𞤖𞤢𞤴 𞤳𞤵𞥅𞤤𞤢𞤤 𞤺𞤮𞥅𞤼𞤢𞤤 𞤺𞤵𞤥𞥆𞤭𞤲𞤺𞤢𞤤 𞤫 𞤲'𞤺𞤢𞤤 𞤯𞤮 𞤲𞤢𞤲𞤮𞤲’𞤣𞤭𞤪𞤢𞤤 𞤬𞤮𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤭 𞤶𞤢𞤺𞥆𞤭𞤪𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤵𞤥𞥆𞤭𞥅 𞤳𞤮 𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭، 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤣𞤫𞤲𞤼𞤢𞤤 𞤳𞤫𞥅𞤪𞤭𞤲𞤺𞤢𞤤، 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤫𞥅𞤪𞤭𞥅𞤯𞤮. 𞤖𞤢𞤴 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤺𞤮𞥅𞤼𞤮، 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤣𞤫𞤲𞤼𞤢𞤤 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤭 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤺𞤮𞤤𞥆𞤫 𞤼𞤢𞤱𞤢 𞤬𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤣𞤢𞥄𞤪𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥𞤫𞤲 𞤳𞤮 𞤬𞤭𞤪𞤼𞤵𞤣𞤫 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭𞤫 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤯𞤭 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞤪 𞤲𞤢𞤲𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤭𞤪𞤢𞤤 𞤲'𞤺𞤢𞤤.
__label__fuf 𞤉 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞤪 𞤳𞤵𞥅𞤼𞤮𞤪𞤮𞤺𞤮𞤤 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤥𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤥 𞤫 𞤲𞤢𞤬𞤼𞤮𞤪𞤮𞤺𞤮𞤤 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵 𞤥𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤮، 𞤥𞤮𞤲𞤭 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤬𞤢𞤱𞤢𞥄 𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤼𞤢𞤲 𞤳𞤮 𞤯𞤮𞥅𞤬𞤼𞤮𞤺𞤮𞤤 𞤧𞤢𞤪𞤯𞤭𞤴𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤲'𞤺𞤢𞤥 𞤼𞤫𞥅ŋ𞤼𞤭𞤲’𞤣𞤫 𞤳𞤫𞤬𞤼𞤭𞤲𞤺𞤮𞤤 𞤫 𞤲𞤫𞤸𞤼𞤢𞤲𞤢𞤺𞤮𞤤 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭𞤫 𞤱𞤮𞤣𞤩𞤫 𞤲'𞤺𞤢𞤥 𞤼𞤭𞤥𞥆𞤭𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤢ŋ 𞤳𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤢𞤤𞤲𞤺𞤢𞤥 𞤺𞤫𞤯𞤫 𞤣𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤳𞤢𞤥 𞤫 𞤲'𞤺𞤮𞤲𞤳𞤢 𞤥𞤮𞤰𞥆𞤢 𞤳𞤵𞥅𞤩𞤼𞤭𞤣𞤭𞤲𞤯𞤮 𞤲'𞤺𞤢𞤥 𞤣𞤢𞤻𞤶𞤫 𞤪𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤮 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤢𞤤.
__label__fuf 𞤚𞤵𞥅𞤺𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤱𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤧𞤵𞤺𞤮𞤤 𞤸𞤫𞤬𞤼𞤭𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤳𞤢𞤻𞤵𞤲 𞤫 𞤧𞤢𞤤𞤢𞤺𞤮𞤤 𞤼𞤮𞤼𞥆𞤵𞤣𞤫 𞤯𞤫𞤲 𞤶𞤮𞤶𞥆𞤢𞤲𞤯𞤫 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤲𞤮 𞤢𞤣𞥆𞤭 𞤥𞤢𞤧𞤭𞥅𞤦𞤮𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤫 𞤧𞤢𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤪𞤫 𞤧𞤢𞤲𞤣𞤮𞤤𞤭𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤲’𞤣𞤫𞤪 𞤢𞤣𞤵𞤲𞤢 𞤳𞤢𞤻𞤵𞤲 𞤫 𞤸𞤵𞤷𞥆𞤢𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤢𞤣𞤵𞤲𞤢𞥄𞤪𞤵 𞤲’𞤣𞤵 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤳𞤫𞤩𞤭 𞤴𞤢𞤥𞤭𞤪𞤮𞥅𞤪𞤫 𞤸𞤢𞥄𞤤𞤵𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤥𞤭𞥅𞤶𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫𞤲𞤮 𞤸𞤫𞤲𞤢𞤲𞤮𞤪𞤭𞥅 𞤯𞤵𞤥 𞤴𞤮𞤲𞤼𞤭𞥅 𞤫𞤼𞤫 𞤳𞤢𞤣𞤭 𞤴𞤭𞤥𞤩𞤫 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤭⹁ 𞤶𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤫 𞤳𞤮𞤴𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥𞤫𞤲 𞤷𞤫𞥅𞤪𞤼𞤢 𞤫 𞤳𞤵𞤤𞤮𞤤 𞤫 𞤦𞤢𞥄𞤧𞤢𞤤 𞤧𞤢𞤦𞤵 𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫𞥅 𞤴𞤭𞤯𞤣𞤫 𞤯𞤵𞤲
__label__fuf SARIYA ON NO POTA E FOW. KALA NO HANNDI E DANDIREEDE ON SARIYA, KO REWA BHURNONDIRAL. FOW NO HANNDI E DANDEEDE TELEMMA HAASINGAAKU BONNITATAYNGU OO SARIYA.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤤𞤭𞤺𞥆𞤮𞤼𞤮𞥅𞤯𞤮 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤮𞤤 𞤼𞤢𞤬𞤣𞤫 𞤬𞤫𞤣𞥆𞤫 𞤱𞤵𞤤𞥆𞤭𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤪𞤫 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞤶𞤭 𞤤𞤭𞤺𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤴 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤴𞤢𞤲𞤼𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤭𞤪𞤣𞤫 𞤬𞤫𞤣𞥆𞤫 𞤤𞤭𞤺𞥆𞤮𞤼𞤮𞥅𞤩𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤫 𞤨𞤫𞤣𞤤𞤫 𞤺𞤮𞤯𞥆𞤫 𞤤𞤭𞤺𞥆𞤮𞤼𞤮𞥅𞤩𞤫 𞤧𞤮 𞤼𞤢𞤱𞤭 𞤫𞤯𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤭 𞤲'𞤺𞤮𞤰 𞤢𞥄𞤶𞤭 𞤫 𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤭𞤴𞤢.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤮 𞤬𞤮𞤼𞤭 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤲'𞤺𞤵𞥅𞤪𞤲𞤣𞤢𞤥 𞤷𞤫𞤥𞤮𞤪𞤯𞤢𞤥 𞤸𞤢𞥄 𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤢𞥄 𞤼𞤮𞤨𞥆𞤭𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤷𞤫𞤤𞥆𞤢𞤤 𞤥𞤵𞤥، 𞤲'𞤺𞤮𞤲𞤳𞤢 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤫𞤳𞤢 𞤩𞤫𞤧𞤲𞤺𞤵 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤸𞤢𞥄 𞤼𞤫𞥅ŋ𞤼𞤭 𞤫 𞤲'𞤺𞤵𞥅𞤪𞤢، 𞤳𞤮𞤯𞤤𞤷𞤭، 𞤧𞤢𞤬𞤢𞥄𞤪𞤢 𞤫 𞤺𞤫𞤯𞤫 𞤪𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤮؛ 𞤮𞤥𞤮 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞥅𞤲𞤳𞤢 𞤧𞤮 𞤼𞤢𞤱𞤭𞥅 𞤮 𞤤𞤭𞤺𞥆𞤢𞥄𞤳𞤭، 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤮 𞤧𞤫𞤤𞥆𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤭 𞤥𞤢 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤮 𞤶𞤮𞤣𞤼𞤢𞥄 𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤣𞤮𞥅𞤤𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥، 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤳𞤫𞤧 𞤶𞤮𞥅𞤯𞤭𞥅𞤯𞤮، 𞤲𞤢𞤴𞤱𞤵𞤯𞤮 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤺𞤫𞤯𞤫 𞤦𞤢𞥄𞤧𞤮𞥅𞤶𞤫 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤭𞤼𞤣𞤫 𞤲'𞤺𞤵𞥅𞤪𞤢 𞤯𞤫 𞤨𞤢𞤱𞤢𞥄𞤳𞤭 𞤫 𞤦𞤫𞤤𞥆𞤢𞤲𞤼𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤫.
__label__fuf 𞤕𞤢𞤺𞥆𞤢𞤤 𞤲'𞤣𞤫 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤣𞤢𞤻𞤭𞥅 𞤣𞤵𞥅𞤩𞤭 𞤳𞤫𞤤𞥆𞤭ƭ𞤵𞤴𞤢 𞤧𞤮 𞤳𞤮 𞤮 𞤣𞤫𞤦𞥆𞤮، 𞤧𞤮 𞤳𞤮 𞤮 𞤺𞤮𞤪𞤳𞤮 𞤬𞤢𞤤𞤼𞤢𞥄 𞤳𞤭 𞤤𞤫𞤻𞤮𞤤، 𞤲'𞤺𞤵𞤪𞤵، 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤮𞤲𞤮 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤪𞤫𞤧𞤣𞤫 𞤥𞤢𞥄 𞤪𞤫𞤧𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫، 𞤮 𞤣𞤢𞤪𞤲𞤢 𞤬𞤮𞥅𞤴𞤪𞤫. 𞤑𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤥𞤩𞤫 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤭 𞤸𞤫𞥅𞤲 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤶𞤮𞤱𞤭𞤼𞤭𞥅𞤯𞤭 𞤫 𞤣𞤫𞤱𞤺𞤢𞤤 𞤧𞤮 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤸𞤵𞤥𞤫𞥅 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤧𞤮 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤭𞤼𞥆𞤫𞥅 (𞤺𞤮𞥅𞤪𞤳𞤮 𞤫 𞤣𞤫𞤱𞤦𞤮).
__label__fuf NEDDHO KALA NO HANDI E NEEDI E DYANDENDEN HAANAAKA YOBHEEDE, BETE KA DUUBHI ARANI. KA DUUBHI ARANI, DYANDE NDEN KO WAADYIBI. DYANDE METTYE DHEN NO HAANAA YANNYEEDE ; NAATUGOL DYANDE TOOWUNDE NDEN NO FAANANI FOW E HOORE NO BHE WAWTIRI, KO REWA FAASA.
__label__fuf NEDDHO KALA, TAWEEDE KO AADEN DYAMAA ON, NO HANDI E KIWAL NGURDAN; HIMO HANNDI E KEBHAL LAATIINGAL HADHANDHIMO KA NGALUUDYI, WONDIINGU MAA KA FAAMUYEEDYI, DHI MAGHAAMU MAKKO, HETTARRE E BHANTAL, GASATA E BHAAWO MUN, SABU WAKKILAARE LEYDI MAKKO NDIN, WONDUDE E HUUWONDIRAL LEYDHE, BATTANE NOONE EBBOORE E NGALUUDYI LEYDI KALA.
__label__fuf TAWEEDE KO WONI KA NDER POTTAL, DYAMAADYI POTTAL LEYDHE ADUNA DHEN FENNYINNO FAHIN HOOLAARE HANDIIDYI KELENHI NEDDHANKE DHIN, E NDER NDIMU E BHANTAL NEDDHANKE, E NDER FOTONDIRAL HANDIIDYI WORBHE E REWBHE, TAWI BHE FENNYINII WAKKILAARE FII BHANTAL NEDDHANKEWAL, E NYNNUGOL PEHE KELENHE, FII NGURDAN E NDER HETTAARE BHURNDE MAWNUDE;
__label__fuf LeYDI WOO, KAWTITAL MAA NEDDHO WOO, GASATAA BHAARORDE SARTIIDYI LINTAADHI E NDEE DYANTOORE MAWNDE FII BONNUGOL HAANANDHI E HETTAAREEDYI WONDHI E MAYRE.
__label__fuf TAWEEDE, MADDYEEDE E BIKKHTAARE HANDANDHI NEDDHO WONUNO SABU AAWASEEDYI TIKKINAY DHI KALA DYON MIIDYO MOYYHO, E TAWDE FOTTONAAMA WONDE KALA NEDDHO KO FAADANII KO ADUNA MO YIMBHE BHEN FOW TAWATA NO HEITII E MUN, NO WAAWI DYANTAADE MAA MIIDYOO KO BHE FAALAA, HARA BHE FAALAA, HAHA BHE DHENYHITAAKI TILFERE MA TAMPERE;
__label__fuf E NDER NAFITORAL HANDANDHIMO, E KA HUUTORAL HETTAARE MAKKO, KALA KO YAANANAA KO HAA KA KEERI, DHI SARIYA WADHI DHIN FII ANDITUGOL TEDDINA HAANANDHI E HETTAARE LUTTUBHE, WONDUDE LAATINGOL BHE E YAMIROODYI FEEWUDHE KA MAGHAAMU, KA WONDIGAL S FII NGURDAN MOYYHAN E NDER KAWTITAL FOTORAL.
__label__fuf 𞤃𞤵𞥅𞤴𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞥅 𞤳𞤮 𞤻𞤭𞤩𞤺𞤮𞤤 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤬𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤣𞤭 𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤥𞤵𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤯𞤭𞥅. 𞤐'𞤣𞤭𞥅𞤲 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤬𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤣𞤭 𞤻𞤭𞤩𞤮𞤪𞤼𞤮𞥅 𞤼𞤢𞤲 𞤧𞤮𞤧𞤣𞤫 𞤱𞤮𞥅𞤼𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤷𞤵𞤩𞤮𞥅 𞤧𞤵𞤩𞤲𞤺𞤮 𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤩𞤲𞤺𞤮 𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢، 𞤼𞤢𞤱𞤢 𞤷𞤵𞤩𞤮𞤼𞤮𞥅 𞤯𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤼𞤮𞤼𞥆𞤫𞥅 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤼𞤭𞤥𞥆𞤵𞤲𞤺𞤵.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤫 𞤸𞤫𞤯𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞤪 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤢𞤤 𞤫 𞤧𞤢𞤸𞤢𞥄 𞤻𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤮𞥅𞤪𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫 𞤴𞤮𞤱𞤭𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤳𞤭، 𞤲'𞤣𞤫 𞤱𞤢𞤯𞤢𞤼𞤢𞥄 𞤸𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤭-𞤸𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤢 (𞤶𞤭𞤲𞥆𞤺𞤢𞤼𞤢𞥄). 𞤻𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤮𞥅𞤩𞤫 𞤩𞤫𞤲𞤺𞤵𞥅𞤪𞤮𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤳𞤮 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤭 𞤻𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤣𞤫 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞤶𞤭 𞤬𞤮𞤼𞤣𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤬𞤮𞤬 𞤳𞤮 𞤼𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤢𞥄 𞤸𞤢𞥄 𞤸𞤫𞤩 𞤲𞤭 𞤯𞤵𞤥 𞤻𞤢𞥄𞤱𞤮𞤪𞤫.
__label__fuf 𞤋𞤲𞥆𞤢𞤥𞤢 𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤬𞤮𞤬 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤭، 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤯𞤭𞤣𞤭 𞤫 𞤶𞤭𞤦𞤭𞤲𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤫 𞤼𞤮 𞤦𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤺𞤫 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭. 𞤉𞤩𞤫 𞤲'𞤺𞤮𞥅𞤣𞤭 𞤥𞤭𞥅𞤶𞤮 𞤫 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤭𞤤𞤢𞤲𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤢𞤤 𞤫𞤼𞤫 𞤫𞤩𞤫 𞤨𞤮𞤼𞤭 𞤸𞤵𞥅𞤬𞤮 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤪𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞤪 𞤩 𞤭𞤴𞤲𞤺𞤵𞤴𞤵𞤥𞥆𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵.
__label__fuf NEDDHO KALA NO HANNDI E GURDAN MOYYHAN FII HATTINGOL TYELLAL MUN, NGALUUDYI MUN, E NEWAARE TAMBITAGOL BHEYGUURE MUN, DYURRIYAADYI MUN, KA GUUREE MUN; DHUN IMMORI KA NEEMAADYI, KOLTUUDYI, WONUNDE E NYAWNDIIGUUDYI MUN KANYUN E HAADYUUDYI MUSIDAL LAABUDDAADYI; HIMO HANDI E FAABEEDE, DANDEE MAKKO: WONI FEWDO ANGAL GOLLE, NYAWU, DYUKKU, MAYREEDE, NAYEEWU MAA HAYRERE GOO.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤫 𞤬𞤮𞥅𞤬𞤼𞤫𞤪𞤫 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤱𞤫𞤤𞤼𞤭𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤩𞤫𞤪𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤲𞤵𞤥 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤱𞤮𞥅𞤣𞤢 𞤯𞤮 𞤸𞤢𞥄’𞤯𞤲𞤭 𞤤𞤭𞤺𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤴 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤫𞤼𞤫 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤤𞤭𞤺𞥆𞤮𞤼𞤮𞥅𞤯𞤮 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤫 𞤬𞤮𞥅𞤬𞤼𞤫𞤪𞤫 𞤴𞤮𞤩 𞤫𞤼𞤫𞥅𞤲𞤣𞤫.
__label__fuf 𞤑𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤲𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵 𞤥𞤭𞥅𞤶𞤮، 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤭𞤤𞤢𞤲𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤢𞤤 𞤳𞤢𞤥 𞤫 𞤣𞤭𞥅𞤲𞤫. 𞤌𞥅𞤲 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤪𞤮𞥅𞤲𞤣𞤭𞥅 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵 𞤱𞤢𞤴𞤤𞤵𞤣𞤫 𞤣𞤭𞥅𞤲𞤫 𞤳𞤢𞤥 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵 𞤼𞤢𞤦𞤭𞤼𞤭𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤣𞤭𞥅𞤲𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤴𞤭 𞤴𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤳𞤢𞤻𞤵𞤥 𞤺𞤮𞥅𞤼𞤮 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤫 𞤱𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤵𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤱𞤮𞤯𞤩𞤫. 𞤐'𞤺𞤢𞥄𞤤 𞤼𞤢𞤦𞤭𞤼𞤭𞤲𞤢𞤤 𞤣𞤭𞥅𞤲𞤫 𞤲𞤮𞥅𞤲 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤲𞤮𞤲𞤢 𞤳𞤮 𞤯𞤵𞥅𞤯𞤭𞥅 𞤫 𞤳𞤮 𞤬𞤫𞥅𞤻𞤭 𞤬𞤮𞤬 𞤼𞤢𞤱𞤢 𞤳𞤮 𞤪𞤫𞤱𞤲𞤫𞥅𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤣𞤮𞤱 𞤶𞤢𞤲𞤣𞤫⹁ 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤣𞤫𞤱𞤢𞤤 𞤱𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤢 𞤶𞤢𞤥𞤭𞤪𞤮𞥅𞤶𞤫 𞤣𞤭𞥅𞤲𞤢 𞤳𞤢𞤲.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤫𞤲𞤫 𞤬𞤮𞤼𞤭 𞤣𞤢𞤪𞤢𞤲𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤻𞤭𞤩𞤢𞤺𞤮𞤤 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤭𞤲𞥆𞤢𞤥𞤢 𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫𞥅 𞤳𞤢𞤥 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤭 𞤥𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵 𞤥𞤵𞤥 𞤼𞤮 𞤦𞤢𞤲𞥆𞤺𞤫 𞤪𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤮 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞤪 𞤱𞤭𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤫𞤪𞤫𞤐'𞤦𞤫𞤤𞤫 𞤳𞤵𞥅𞤤𞤫 𞤳𞤢𞥄𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤯𞤫 𞤫𞤲𞤣𞤫𞤪 𞤲'𞤺𞤢𞤤𞤯𞤮 𞤲𞤢𞤲𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤭𞤪𞤢𞤤 𞤲'𞤶𞤫𞤼𞥆𞤮 𞤬𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤣𞤢𞥄𞤪𞤫 𞤼𞤮𞤯𞥆𞤢𞥄𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫.
__label__fuf 𞤐𞤫𞤯𞥆𞤮 𞤳𞤢𞤤𞤢 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞤪 𞤪𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤮 𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤶𞤮𞤺𞤭𞥅 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤫𞥅𞤲 𞤳𞤢 𞤪𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤮𞤴𞤢𞤲𞤳𞤫𞥅𞤱𞤮. 𞤯𞤵𞤥𞤳𞤮 𞤱𞤫𞤤𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤪𞤫 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤬𞤢𞤺𞥆𞤵𞤣𞤵𞤴𞤢𞤲𞤳𞤮𞤶 𞤫 𞤪𞤫𞤲𞥆𞤣𞤮𞤴𞤢𞤲 𞤸𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤫 𞤨𞤭𞤲𞤢 𞤴𞤢𞤲𞤳𞤮𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤳𞤢𞤼𞤮𞤶𞤭𞤲𞤢𞥄 𞤯𞤭 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵 𞤫 𞤩𞤢𞤥𞤼𞤢𞥄𞤪𞤫 𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤣𞤮𞤱 𞤼𞤵𞥅𞤺𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤲'𞤺𞤮𞤲𞤳𞤢 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤣𞤭 𞤬𞤮𞤬.
__label__fuf 𞤉 𞤼𞤵𞥅𞤺𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤫 𞤱𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤯𞤫𞥅𞤤𞤫 𞤣𞤫𞤲𞤼𞤵𞤯𞤫 𞤶𞤫𞤴𞤼𞤭𞥅𞤯𞤫 𞤯𞤫𞥅، 𞤫 𞤦𞤢𞤤𞥆𞤮𞤲𞤣𞤭𞤪𞤢𞤤 𞤫 𞤬𞤫𞤣𞥆𞤫 𞤤𞤫𞤴𞤯𞤫𞥅𞤤𞤫 𞤣𞤫𞤲𞤼𞤵𞤯𞤫 𞤶𞤫𞤴𞤯𞤫 𞤳𞤮𞤴𞤫 𞤥𞤵𞤥𞤫𞤲 𞤨𞤫𞤤𞥆𞤭𞤼𞤭𞥅 𞤻𞤭𞥅𞤩𞤲𞤵𞤣𞤫 𞤸𞤮𞤪𞤥𞤢 𞤸𞤢𞤳𞥆𞤫𞥅𞤶𞤭 𞤢𞥄𞤣𞤫 𞤳𞤢𞤥 𞤫 𞤲'𞤣𞤭𞤥𞤢𞥄𞤺𞤵،
__label__fuf KALA NEDDHO NO HANNDI E INNORDE LEYDI.
__label__fuf GOOTO KARHETAAKE FII TAWEEDE E HUUWODIRAL.
__label__ur ویسٹ یونین (West Union) کے لیے آپ مندرجہ ذیل صفحات سے رجوع کر سکتے ہیں۔ مقامات ریاستہائے متحدہ ویسٹ یونین، الینوائے ویسٹ یونین، آئیووا ویسٹ یونین، مینیسوٹا ویسٹ یونین، نیو یارک ویسٹ یونین، اوہائیو ویسٹ یونین، اوریگون ویسٹ یونین، جنوبی کیرولائنا ویسٹ یونین، مغربی ورجینیا ضد ابہام صفحات نام مقامات ضد ابہام صفحات
__label__ur بیکر ٹاؤن شپ (Baker Township) کے لیے آپ مندرجہ ذیل صفحات سے رجوع کر سکتے ہیں۔ مقامات ریاستہائے متحدہ بیکر ٹاؤن شپ، ازارڈ کاؤنٹی، آرکنساس بیکر ٹاؤن شپ، لافائیٹ کاؤنٹی، آرکنساس بیکر ٹاؤن شپ، رینڈولف کاؤنٹی، آرکنساس بیکر ٹاؤن شپ، مورگن کاؤنٹی، انڈیانا بیکر ٹاؤن شپ، اوبرائن کاؤنٹی، آئیووا بیکر ٹاؤن شپ، اوسیولا کاؤنٹی، آئیووا بیکر ٹاؤن شپ، کرافورڈ کاؤنٹی، کنساس بیکر ٹاؤن شپ، گوو کاؤنٹی، کنساس بیکر ٹاؤن شپ، سٹیونس کاؤنٹی، مینیسوٹا ضد ابہام صفحات نام مقامات ضد ابہام صفحات ٹاؤن شپ نام ضد ابہام صفحات Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur 2930 (عدد) یعنی 2930 ایک عدد اور ایک علامت ہے۔ کچھ عددی نظاموں میں 2929 سے بڑا یا زیادہ اور 2931 سے چھوٹا یا کم ہوتا ہے۔ گنتی میں اسے دو ہزار نو سو تیس یا انتیس سو تیس بولا جاتا ہے۔ اور اس سے پہلے دو ہزار نو سو انتیس یا انتیس سو انتیس اور اس کے بعد دو ہزار نو سو اکتیس یا انتیس سو اکتیس بولا جاتا ہے۔ انفرادی خصوصیات عمومی خصوصیات حوالہ جات ابتدائی حساب صحیح اعداد
__label__ur ینگ امریکا، انڈیانا ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو Cass County میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات ینگ امریکا، انڈیانا کا رقبہ 1.1 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 115 افراد پر مشتمل ہے اور 232.87 میٹر سطح دریا سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا فہرست ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکہ کے شہر حوالہ جات انڈیانا میں انانکارپوریٹڈ علاقے 1850ء کی دہائی میں آباد ہونے والے مقامات ریاستہائے متحدہ میں 1850ء کی دہائی کی تاسیسات
__label__ur سینٹر ٹاؤن شپ، یونین کاؤنٹی، انڈیانا ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک ٹاؤن شپ جو یونین کاؤنٹی، انڈیانا میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات سینٹر ٹاؤن شپ، یونین کاؤنٹی، انڈیانا کا رقبہ 72.52 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 3,048 افراد پر مشتمل ہے اور 320 میٹر سطح سمندر سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا فہرست ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکہ کے شہر حوالہ جات انڈیانا کے ٹاؤن شپ یونین کاؤنٹی، انڈیانا میں ٹاؤن شپ Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur ناگدا بھارت کا ایک آباد مقام جو Ujjain district میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات ناگدا کا رقبہ 120 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 116,525 افراد پر مشتمل ہے اور 529 میٹر سطح سمندر سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے بھارت فہرست بھارت کے شہر حوالہ جات بھارت میں کمپنی ٹاؤن مدھیہ پردیش کے شہر en:Nagda
__label__ur علم حدیث میں اس سے مراد وہ حدیث ہے جس میں ہر راوی روایت کرنے سے پہلے کوئی قول یا فعل پیش کرے جیسے مجھے فلاں نے یہ حدیث بیان کی جبکہ یہ حدیث میں نے سب سے پہلے سنی۔ یایہ کہے کہ اس نے پہلے یہ الفاظ کہے انی احبک یہ حدیث قولی کہلائے گی یا یہ کہے جب اس نے روایت بیان کی وہ کجھور کھا رہا تھا یا اس نے اپنی داڑھی پر ہاتھ رکھا ہوا تھا یہ حدیث فعلی کی مثال ہے۔ یا کوئی نقص یا عیب بیان ہو اور وہ نقص ابتدا سے آخر تک تسلسل سے بیان ہو رہا ہو جیسے ایک حدیث سفیان بن عیینہ سے صرف روایت ہے اور ابتدا سے انتہا تک یہ الفاظ ملتے ہیں کہ فقد وھم(انہیں وہم ہوا ) حديث المسلسل بالأوليۃ کی مثال حوالہ جات اصطلاحات حدیث
__label__ur لودھراں سے خانیوال کے درمیان یہ ریلوے لائن کراچی–پشاور مرکزی ریلوے لائن کا ہی حصہ ہے۔ اسے شارٹ لائن یا کورڈ لائن بھی کہتے ہیں بہت سی گاڑیاں جن کا سٹاپ ملتان نہیں ہوتا، وہ لودھراں سے خانیوال کی اس لائن پر ملتان جائے بغیر سفر کرتی ہیں۔ اس لائن پر درج ذیل اسٹیشنز ہیں: لودھراں جنکشن ریلوے اسٹیشن شہیداںوالا ریلوے اسٹیشن رکن پور ریلوے اسٹیشن دنیا پور ریلوے اسٹیشن قطب پور ریلوے اسٹیشن جہانیاں ریلوے اسٹیشن پرویز والا ریلوے اسٹیشن جنگل ماریالا ریلوے اسٹیشن مہر شاہ ریلوے اسٹیشن خانیوال جنکشن ریلوے اسٹیشن مزید دیکھیے پاکستان کی ریلوے لائنیں حوالہ جات پاکستان کی ریلوے لائنیں ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل پاکستان میں 5 فٹ 6 انچ گیج ریلوے
__label__ur کراپا بھارت کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو آندھرا پردیش میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات کراپا کی مجموعی آبادی 6,593 افراد پر مشتمل ہے اور 3 میٹر سطح سمندر سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے بھارت فہرست بھارت کے شہر حوالہ جات Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur میکا ضلع ( ہسپانوی: Maca District) پیرو کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو اریکیپا علاقہ میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات میکا ضلع کا رقبہ 227.48 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 1,307 افراد پر مشتمل ہے اور 3,262 میٹر سطح دریا سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے پیرو فہرست پیرو کے شہر حوالہ جات ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل
__label__ur بونیار بھارت کا ایک آباد مقام جو جموں و کشمیر میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات بونیار کی مجموعی آبادی 72,564 افراد پر مشتمل ہے اور 1,577 میٹر سطح سمندر سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے بھارت فہرست بھارت کے شہر حوالہ جات ضلع بارہ مولہ کے شہر اور قصبات جغرافیہ جموں و کشمیر کے نامکمل مضامین
__label__ur کوٹیہڑا بھٹیاں پاکستان کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو ضلع چکوال تحصیل تلہ گنگ میں واقع ہے۔بھیلو مار اور چنجی کے درمیان ہے اس کی تحصیل تلہ گنگ ہے۔سرگودھا روڈ پرواقع ہے تفصیلات مزید دیکھیے پاکستان فہرست پاکستان کے شہر حوالہ جات ضلع چکوال کے آباد مقامات
__label__ur زہرا، اردبیل ایران کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو Ojarud-e Sharqi Rural District میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات زہرا، اردبیل کی مجموعی آبادی 161 افراد پر مشتمل ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ایران فہرست ایران کے شہر حوالہ جات جغرافیہ شہرستان گرمی کے نامکمل مضامین
__label__ur نئیما کاؤنٹی (لاطینی: Nyima County) چین کا ایک عوامی جمہوریہ چین کی کاؤنٹیاں جو ناگچو میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے چین چین کے شہروں کی فہرست حوالہ جات تبت کی کاؤنٹی سطح تقسیمات Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur کیسمایو ضلع صومالیہ کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو زیریں جوبا میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے صومالیہ فہرست صومالیہ کے شہر حوالہ جات زیریں جوبا صومالیہ کے اضلاع کامنز زمرہ جس کا ربط ویکی ڈیٹا پر ہے ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل
__label__ur Articles using Infobox station with markup inside name گلشہر میٹرو اسٹیشن تہران میٹرو لائن 5 کا سابقہ مغربی سرا ہے۔ یہ کرج کے جنوب مغرب میں مہرشہر میں واقع ہے۔ دسمبر 2019ء میں لائن 5 کو اس اسٹیشن سے آگے مغرب میں ہشتگرد تک بڑھا دیا گیا ہے۔ خدمات اے ٹی ایم بینک ٹیکسی اسٹیشن سپر مارکیٹ مزار گاڑیاں کھڑی کرنے کے لیے مخصوص جگہ بس ٹرمینل ایسکلیٹر پے فون بیت الخلاء سنیک بار سہولیات اسٹیشن میں ٹکٹ آفس، ایسکلیٹرز، کیش مشین، ٹیکسی اسٹینڈ، پے فون کی سہولت موجود ہے۔ حوالہ جات ویکی ڈیٹا پر موجود متناسقات تہران میں نقل و حمل میٹرو اسٹیشنوں کی فہرستیں تہران میں میٹرو اسٹیشن کی فہرست تہران متعلقہ فہرستیں
__label__ur Articles using Infobox station with markup inside name نعمت آباد میٹرو اسٹیشن تہران میٹرو کی لائن 3 میں واقع ایک اسٹیشن ہے جو راو اوشالوم کی جائے پیدائش تھی۔ سہولیات اسٹیشن میں ٹکٹ آفس، ایسکلیٹرز، کیش مشین، ٹیکسی اسٹینڈ، پے فون کی سہولت موجود ہے۔ حوالہ جات ایران میں 2014ء کی تاسیسات 2014ء میں قائم ہونے والے ریلوے اسٹیشن تہران میں نقل و حمل میٹرو اسٹیشنوں کی فہرستیں تہران میں میٹرو اسٹیشن کی فہرست تہران متعلقہ فہرستیں
__label__ur کولمبس، کینٹکی ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو کینٹکی میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات کولمبس، کینٹکی کا رقبہ 1.1 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 229 افراد پر مشتمل ہے اور 140 میٹر سطح سمندر سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا فہرست ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکہ کے شہر حوالہ جات کینٹکی کے شہر ہکمین کاؤنٹی، کینٹکی میں شہر کامنز زمرہ جس کا ربط ویکی ڈیٹا پر ہے
__label__ur بیلے ویل ٹاؤن شپ، سینٹ کلیر کاؤنٹی، الینوائے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک شہر جو الینوائے میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات بیلے ویل ٹاؤن شپ، سینٹ کلیر کاؤنٹی، الینوائے کی مجموعی آبادی 43,765 افراد پر مشتمل ہے۔ جڑواں شہر شہر بیلے ویل ٹاؤن شپ، سینٹ کلیر کاؤنٹی، الینوائے کا جڑواں شہر Paderborn ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا فہرست ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکہ کے شہر حوالہ جات الینوائے کے شہر الینوائے میں کاؤنٹی نشستیں سینٹ کلیر کاؤنٹی، الینوائے میں شہر en:Belleville, Illinois
__label__ur زیریں سوات وادی سوات اور مالاکنڈ میں واقع ایک اہم تاریخی علاقہ ہے۔ اس علاقے میں آریائی لوگوں کے ابتدائی دور کے آثار موجود ہیں۔ اس کے ساتھ ہی سیدو شریف میں بدھ مت دور کی خانقاہوں کے آثار موجود ہیں۔ پاکستان میں آثار قدیمہ تاریخ پاکستان ضلع دیر زیریں ضلع سوات گندھارا پاکستان میں بدھ مقامات خیبر پختونخوا میں آثار قدیمہ مقامات ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل
__label__ur لون راک، آئیووا ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک شہر جو کوسوتھ کاؤنٹی، آئیووا میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات لون راک، آئیووا کا رقبہ 0.31 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 146 افراد پر مشتمل ہے اور 366 میٹر سطح سمندر سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا ریاستہائے متحدہ کے شہر حوالہ جات آئیووا کے شہر آئیووا میں 1899ء کی تاسیسات کوسوتھ کاؤنٹی، آئیووا میں شہر 1899ء میں آباد ہونے والے مقامات Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur آصف اقبال (پیدائش: 12 جنوری 1984ء) ایک پاکستانی نژاد کرکٹ کھلاڑی ہے جو متحدہ عرب امارات کی قومی کرکٹ ٹیم کے لیے کھیلا۔ اس نے 16 نومبر 2015ء کو 2015-17ء آئی سی سی ورلڈ کرکٹ لیگ چیمپئن شپ میں ہانگ کانگ کے خلاف ایک روزہ بین الاقوامی کرکٹ کا آغاز کیا۔ حوالہ جات متحدہ عرب امارات کی طرف سے کھیلنے والے پاکستانی کھلاڑی بہاولپور کے کرکٹ کھلاڑی بہاولپور سے کرکٹ کھلاڑی متحدہ عرب امارات کے ایک روزہ کرکٹ کھلاڑی اماراتی کرکٹ کھلاڑی بقید حیات شخصیات 1984ء کی پیدائشیں
__label__ur جالبینی مراقبت بلحاظ ملک (Internet censorship by country) دنیا بھر کے ممالک میں جاری جالبینی مراقبت (انٹرنیٹ سنسر شپ) کی اقسام اور سطح یا فلٹر پر معلومات فراہم کرتا ہے۔ مزہد دیکھیے جالبینی مراقبت سینسرشپ بلحاظ ملک حوالہ جات جالبینی مراقبت بلحاظ ملک ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل
__label__ur حلقہ این اے۔68 (سرگودھا-5) پاکستان قومی اسمبلی کا ایک انتخابی حلقہ ہے۔ انتخابات 2008ء تفصیلی مضمون کے لیے دیکھیے:پاکستان کے عام انتخابات 2008ء نتائج اس حلقے میں انتخابات 2008ء کے نتائج درج ذیل ہیں۔ سید جاوید حسنین شاہ قومی اسمبلی کے انتخابات میں اس حلقے سے 2008ء میں کامیاب ہوا۔ انتخابات 2013ء 2013 کے عام انتخابات 11 مئی 2013 کو ہوئے۔ نتیجہ پاکستان مسلم لیگ (ن) کے محمد نواز شریف نے 140546 ووٹ حاصل کر کامیابی حاصل کی۔ حوالہ جات بیرونی روابط 's%20official%20website الیکشن کے نتائج] پاکستان کے انتخابی حلقے پنجاب (پاکستان) کے انتخابی حلقے پنجاب، پاکستان حلقہ انتخاب نامکمل
__label__ur قیس بن عائد احمسی بجلی جن کی ابو کاہل کنیت تھی جو زیادہ مشہور ہے۔ جو نوجوان صحابہ میں سے تھے ، انہوں نے پیغمبر اکرم کو اونٹ پر وعظ کرتے ہوئے دیکھا تھا، کوفہ سے تھے، اپنے علاقہ میں امام تھے۔ سوانح عمری انہوں نے کہا کہ صحبت اور رویت کی تھی۔ 80ھ تک زندہ رہے، اور کہا جاتا ہے کہ ان کی وفات حجاج بن یوسف ثقفی زمانے میں ہوئی، اور کہا جاتا ہے کہ ان کی وفات مختار ثقفی کے زمانے میں ہوئی۔ حوالہ جات کوفہ میں وفات پانے والی شخصیات 80ھ کی وفیات صحابی راویان حدیث صحابہ و صحابیات صفحات مع ویکی ڈیٹا حوالہ جات 699ء کی وفیات
__label__ur لشکر گاہ (Lashkar Gah) (پشتو: لښکرګاه؛ فارسی: لشکرگاه) جسے تاریخی طور پر بست (Bost) بھی کہا جاتا جنوبی افغانستان میں ایک شہر ہے جو صوبہ ہلمند کا دارالحکومت ہے۔ بیرونی روابط لشکر گاہ بلدیہ ہلمند کی تصاویر افغانستان کے شہر صوبہ ہلمند کے آباد مقامات کامنز زمرہ جس کا ربط ویکی ڈیٹا پر ہے Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur سینڈرا بولاک ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کی ایک فلمی اداکارہ ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے فہرست امریکی فلمی اداکارائیں امریکی سنیما حوالہ جات 1964ء کی پیدائشیں آرلنگٹن کاؤنٹی، ورجینیا کی شخصیات آسٹن، ٹیکساس کی اداکارائیں اکیسویں صدی کی امریکی اداکارائیں اکیڈمی ایوارڈز اعزاز یافتگان برائے بہترین اداکارہ امریکی فلم پروڈیوسر امریکی فلمی اداکارائیں امریکی ٹیلی ویژن اداکارائیں امریکی ہمدرد عوام ایسٹ کیرولائنا یونیورسٹی کے فضلا بقید حیات شخصیات بیسویں صدی کی امریکی اداکارائیں جرمن نژاد امریکی شخصیات خواتین ٹیلی وژن پروڈیوسرز لوزیانا کی کاروباری شخصیات نیو اورلینز کی اداکارائیں امریکی خواتین فلم پروڈیوسرز نیو اورلینز کی کاروباری شخصیات ورجینیا کی اداکارائیں بانیان امریکی کمپنی ورجینیا کے ٹیلی وژن پروڈیوسرز ٹیکساس کے ٹیلی وژن پروڈیوسرز امریکی خواتین ٹیلی وژن پروڈیوسرز جرمنی کے وطن گیر شہری ریستوران کی خواتین مالک ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل Short description is different from Wikidata واشنگٹن-لبرٹی ہائی اسکول کے فضلا
__label__ur جوزف بروکس (پیدائش:10 ستمبر 1870ء)|(انتقال:15 مئی 1937ء) ایک انگریز کرکٹ کھلاڑی تھا جس نے 1895ء اور 1896ء میں ڈربی شائر کے لیے اول درجہ کرکٹ کھیلی۔بروکس ساؤتھ نارمنٹن ، ڈربی شائر میں پیدا ہوئے، جان بروکس کا بیٹا ایک کوئلہ کان کن اور اس کی بیوی ماریا۔ اس نے ڈربی شائر کے لیے اگست 1895ء میں ہیمپشائر کے خلاف ڈیبیو کیا جب انھوں نے کھیلی گئی واحد اننگز میں ناٹ آؤٹ 2 رنز بنائے۔ اس نے 1895ء کے سیزن میں دو اور اور 1896ء کے سیزن میں دو اور کھیلے۔بروکس نے 5 اول درجہ میچوں میں 2,66 کی اوسط اور 6 کے ٹاپ سکور کے ساتھ 7اننگز کھیلیں۔ میں آخری آدمی کے طور پر وہ اپنے کیریئر میں صرف تین بار باہر دیا گیا تھا. وہ بائیں ہاتھ کے فاسٹ میڈیم باؤلر تھے اور انہوں نے 95.00 کی اوسط سے 2 وکٹیں حاصل کیں۔ انتقال بروکس کا انتقال 15 مئی 1937ء کو شٹل ووڈ، ڈربی شائر میں 66 سال کی عمر میں ہوا۔ مزید دیکھیے کرکٹ فرسٹ کلاس کرکٹ ڈربی شائر کاؤنٹی کرکٹ کلب کے کھلاڑیوں کی فہرست حوالہ جات انگلستان کے کرکٹ کھلاڑی ڈربی شائر کے کرکٹ کھلاڑی 1937ء کی وفیات 1870ء کی پیدائشیں
__label__ur ایراپیترا یونان کا ایک آباد مقام ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے یونان فہرست یونان کے شہر حوالہ جات یونان کے صوبے کریٹ کی بلدیات لاسیتھی کے آباد مقامات کامنز زمرہ جس کا ربط ویکی ڈیٹا پر ہے Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur 2018ء فیفا عالمی کپ فائنل () ایسوسی ایشن فٹ بال کا ایک میچ ہے جو 2018ء فیفا عالمی کپ کے فاتح کا تعین کے لیے فرانس اور کرویئشا کی قومی فٹ بال ٹیمون کے درمیان میں لوژنئکی اسٹیڈیم، ماسکو میں 15 جولائی 2018ء کو کھیلا گیا، جس میں فرانس نے کوریئشا کے 2 گول کے مقابلے میں 4 گول کیے اور عالمی کپ کا فائنل جیت گئی۔ فائنل کو راستہ میچ تفصیلات بیرونی روابط Official Documents and Match Documents حوالہ جات 2018ء فیفا عالمی کپ فیفا عالمی کپ فائنل کامنز زمرہ جس کا ربط ویکی ڈیٹا پر ہے ماسکو میں کھیلوں کے مقابلے Short description is different from Wikidata ماسکو میں فٹ بال
__label__ur یچماتا، چبا ( لاطینی: Yachimata, Chiba) جاپان کا ایک جاپانی شہر جو چیبا پریفیکچر میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات یچماتا، چبا کا رقبہ 74.87 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے، اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 72,277 افراد پر مشتمل ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے جاپان فہرست جاپان کے شہر حوالہ جات چیبا پریفیکچر کے شہر کامنز زمرہ جس کا ربط ویکی ڈیٹا پر ہے Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur سان رافائیل جنوبی نکاراگوا کا ایک آباد مقام جو ماناگوا محکمہ میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات سان رافائیل جنوبی کا رقبہ 357.3 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 41,574 افراد پر مشتمل ہے۔ جڑواں شہر شہر سان رافائیل جنوبی کا جڑواں شہر Friedrichshain-Kreuzberg ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے نکاراگوا فہرست نکاراگوا کے شہر حوالہ جات نکاراگوا کے آباد مقامات نکاراگوا جغرافیہ نامکمل
__label__ur پتریاٹہ (Patriata) جسے نیا مری بھی کہا جاتا ہے شمالی پنجاب، پاکستان میں ایک پہاڑی مستقر ہے۔ یہ مری کے 15 کلومیٹر جنوب مشرق میں واقع ہے۔ محل وقوع پتریاٹہ ضلع راولپنڈی کی تحصیل مری میں واقع ہے۔ اس علاقے کا سب سے بلند ترین نقطہ سطح سمندر سے 6790 فٹ (2070 میٹر) ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے فہرست پاکستان کے پہاڑی مستقر حوالہ جات بیرونی روابط ویکی سفر تصاویر مجازی سیاحت پاکستان کے پہاڑی مستقر پنجاب کے سیاحتی مقامات مری مری کے سیاحتی مقامات کامنز زمرہ جس کا ربط ویکی ڈیٹا پر ہے جغرافیہ پنجاب (پاکستان) کے نامکمل مضامین
__label__ur دھڑنکے_لالکے پاکستان کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو ضلع حافظ آباد میں واقع ہے۔ یہ ایک یونین کونسل بھی ہے مزید دیکھیے پاکستان فہرست پاکستان کے شہر حوالہ جات پنجاب، پاکستان کی تحصیلیں ضلع حافظ آباد کی یونین کونسلیں ضلع حافظ آباد کے آباد مقامات
__label__ur تلونڈی بھنڈراں( انگریزی: Talwandi Bhindran) پنجاب پاکستان کا ایک قصبہ اور تحصیل نارو وال کی یونین کونسل نمبر 42 ہے جو ضلع نارووال میں واقع ہے۔ محل وقوع یہ دریائے راوی کے کنارے پر واقع ہے جو ہندوستان کی سرحد سے تقریبا 10–12 کلومیٹر دور ہے۔ تاریخ یہ قصبہ اٹھارویں صدی میں تلونڈی بھنڈراں نامی ایک شخص کے نام پر قائم کیا گیا تھا تلونڈی سنگھ جٹ قبیلے سے تھا اور اسی لئے اس کی ذیلی ذات بھنڈر تھی ۔ اور بعد میں اس جگہ کو تلونڈی بھنڈراں کے نام سے پکارا گیا ۔ برطانوی راج سے 1991ء تک ضلع سیالکوٹ کا حصہ رہا حوالہ جات شہر ریاستیں ضلع نارووال کی یونین کونسلیں ضلع نارووال کے آباد مقامات ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل
__label__ur 1329 (عدد) یعنی 1329 ایک عدد اور ایک علامت ہے۔ کچھ عددی نظاموں میں 1328 سے بڑا یا زیادہ اور 1330 سے چھوٹا یا کم ہوتا ہے۔ گنتی میں اسے ایک ہزار تین سو انتیس یا تیرہ سو انتیس بولا جاتا ہے۔ اور اس سے پہلے ایک ہزار تین سو اٹھائیس یا تیرہ سو اٹھائیس اور اس کے بعد ایک ہزار تین سو تیس یا تیرہ سو تیس بولا جاتا ہے۔ انفرادی خصوصیات عمومی خصوصیات حوالہ جات ابتدائی حساب صحیح اعداد
__label__ur فریناروس قبرص کا ایک گاؤں و کمیونل کونسل جو ضلع فاماگوستا میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات فریناروس کی مجموعی آبادی 4,298 افراد پر مشتمل ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے قبرص قبرص کے شہروں کی فہرست حوالہ جات ضلع فاماگوستا کے آباد مقامات Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur لیکز ریجن کمیونٹی کالج ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو لاکونیا، نیو ہیمپ شائر میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کے شہروں کی فہرست حوالہ جات 1967ء میں قائم ہونے والے تعلیمی ادارے نیو ہیمپشائر میں 1967ء کی تاسیسات نیو ہیمپشائر میں جامعات اور کالج نیو ہیمپشائر میں عوامی جامعات اور کالج نیو ہیمپشائر میں کمیونٹی کالجز
__label__ur واقعات 1534ء جیکس کارٹیئر پہلا یورپین جو پرنس ایڈورڈ آئی لینڈ پہنچا 1950ء انڈونیشیا اقوام متحدہ کا رکن بننے والا ساٹھواں ملک بنا۔ 1949ء جنگ عظیم دوم کے بعد امریکی فوج نے کوریا سے انخلا کیا ولادت - 1901ء - نیلسن ایڈی امریکی گلوکار اور اداکار (وفات: 1967ء) - 1925ء - کارا ولیمز امریکی اداکارہ - 1931ء - ایڈ گلبرٹ امریکی اداکار (وفات: 1999ء) - 19514ء - ڈان روزا امریکی مصنف وفات - 1960ء - فرینک پیٹریک کینیڈین آئس ہاکی کا کھلاڑی اور کوچ (پیدائیش: 1885ء) 1979ء - ڈاکٹر وزیر الحسن عابدی بروز جمعہ اردو و فارسی ادیب( لاہور) 2023ء- شکیل پاکستان ٹیلی ویژن کے ممتاز اداکار تعطیلات و تہوار سیچیلیس کا یوم آزادی حوالہ جات ایام سال جون Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur فجر - 5 (فارسی زبان میں: موشک فچر - 5 ) ایران کا بنایا ہوا انفنٹری راکٹ ہے جو حال ہی میں ایران فوج، شام فوج،حزب اللہ اور حماس میں شامل کیا گیا ہے۔ اسے صنایع دفاعی ایران نے بنایا ہے۔ 333 ملی میٹر دھانے کے یہ راکٹ سسٹم کے ہر یونٹ میں 4 میزائیل ٹیوبز ہوتی ہیں۔ اس کی رینج 75 کلو میٹر تک ہے اس کے راکٹ کا وزن 915 کلو گرام ہوتا ہے۔ ایران کے ہتھیار غزہ کی پٹی کوتاہ برد قذائفی صاروخ Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur طلسم ہوش رُبا اردو کے داستانوی ادب میں ایک معروف و مقبول کتاب کی حیثیت رکھتی ہےاور قصہ گوئی کا ایک نادر ترین نمونہ ہے۔ یہ داستانِ امیر حمزہ کا حصہ ہے جس کی لگ بھگ 46 جلدیں ہیں، طلسم ہوش ربا کی 9 جلدیں اور کم و بیش دس ہزار صفحات ہیں۔ ہندوستان کے نامور نقاد شمس الرحمن فاروقی نے پوری داستان کو جمع کرنے اور اس پر تنقید کا فریضہ انجام دیا۔ تاریخ 1880ء میں منشی محمد حسین جاہ نامی داستان گو نے اس کی تالیف کی اور انھوں نے 1891ء تک اس کی چار جلدیں لکھیں۔ بعد میں ایک اور داستان گو احمد حسین قمر نے 1897ء مزید دو جلدوں کا "بقیۂ طلسم ہوش ربا" کے نام سے اضافہ کیا۔ اسلوب اس ناول میں مافوق الفطرت مناظر، ساحرانہ کمالات، دیوزادوں اور پریوں کی داستان ہیں۔ حوالہ جات اردو داستان
__label__ur لونگ کریک ٹاؤن شپ، ماکون کاؤنٹی، الینوائے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک ٹاؤن شپ جو ماکون کاؤنٹی، الینوائے میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کے شہروں کی فہرست حوالہ جات الینوائے کے ٹاؤن شپ ماکون کاؤنٹی، الینوائے میں ٹاؤن شپ Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur سارہ منصور (پیدائش 30 جنوری 1988ء میں راولپنڈی) ایک پاکستانی ٹینس کھلاڑی ہے۔ پاکستان کی فید کپ ٹیم میں کھیلتے ہوئے سارہ منصور کے پاس، ہار جیت ک 6-23 کا ریکارڈ ہے۔ ابتدائی زندگی سارہ منصور راولپنڈی میں 30 جنوری 1988ء کو پیدا ہوئی اور 13 سال کی عمر سے ٹینس شروع کی۔ ٹینس 2011 میں، انہوں نے سارہ محبوب خان، اوشنا سہیل اور صبا عزیز کے ساتھ مل کر تاریخ رقم کی جب پاکستان ایک دہائی کی عدم موجودگی کے بعد فیڈ کپ مقابلے میں دوبارہ شریک ہوا۔ 2016ء میں سارہ مصنور نے، گوہاٹی میں جنوب ایشیائی کھیل میں سنگل مقابلوں میں کانسی کا تمغا جیتا۔ فیڈ کپ میں شرکت سنگل ڈبل حوالہ جات بیرونی روابط 1988ء کی پیدائشیں بقید حیات شخصیات راولپنڈی کی شخصیات پاکستانی خواتین ٹینس کھلاڑی ایشیائی کھیل، 2014ء میں شریک ٹینس کھلاڑی ایشیائی کھیل، 2018ء میں شریک ٹینس کھلاڑی جنوب ایشیائی کھیلوں میں پاکستانی کانسی تمغا یافتگان ایشیائی کھیلوں میں شریک پاکستانی کھلاڑی South Asian Games medalists in tennis ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل اکیسویں صدی کی پاکستانی خواتین
__label__ur پاول فلورین (پیدائش: 12 فروری 1979ء) رومانیہ کے بین الاقوامی کرکٹر ہیں جو قومی کرکٹ ٹیم کے لیے بطور باؤلر کھیلتے ہیں۔ فلورین 2019ء میں یورپین کرکٹ لیگ میں کھیلتے ہوئے اس وقت مشہور ہوئیں، جب ان کے باؤلنگ ایکشن کو ظاہر کرنے والی ایک ویڈیو سوشل میڈیا پر وائرل ہوئی۔ جولائی 2021ء میں فلورین ایک بار پھر سرخیوں میں آگئے، یورپین کرکٹ لیگ میں ٹی10 گیم میں وکٹ لینے کے بعد وہ اپنی ٹیموں کا نام مائکروفون میں چلانے سے پہلے جشن منانے کے لیے کمنٹری باکس کی طرف بھاگے۔ دسمبر 2022ء کے اوائل میں، فلورین نے بگ بیش لیگ کی ٹیم میلبورن سٹار ز کے ساتھ 2 گیمز کے ایمبیسیڈر معاہدے پر دستخط کیے۔ کلج کرکٹ کلب کے صدر ہونے کے علاوہ فلورین ایک باڈی گارڈ کے طور پر کام کرتی ہے۔ حوالہ جات رومانیہ کے عالمی ٹوئنٹی/20 کرکٹ کھلاڑی کلوژ-ناپوکا کی شخصیات بقید حیات شخصیات 1979ء کی پیدائشیں
__label__ur ہابومیونسپلٹی ( سویڈش: Håbo Municipality) سویڈن کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو اوپسالا کاؤنٹی میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے سویڈن فہرست سویڈن کے شہر حوالہ جات سویڈن کی بلدیات کامنز زمرہ جس کا ربط ویکی ڈیٹا پر ہے ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل
__label__ur جیمز بروک (James Brooke) ایک برطانوی مہم جو تھا جو سلطنت برطانیہ میں اپنے کاناموں کی بدولت مملکت سراواک کا پہلا گورا راجا بنا۔ 1803ء کی پیدائشیں 1868ء کی وفیات انسداد قذاقی ایشیا میں انیسویں صدی کے فرماں روا ایل جی بی ٹی شاہی اقتدار دو جنسی مرد فعالیت پسند آزادی کامنز زمرہ جس کا ربط ویکی ڈیٹا پر ہے Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur کارز 2017ء میں بنی ایک امریکی کارٹونی مزاحیہ ایڈونچر فلم ہے۔ بیرونی روابط 2010ء کی دہائی کی امریکی اینیمیٹڈ فلمیں 2010ء کی دہائی کی ایکشن فلمیں 2010ء کی دہائی کی بچوں اینیمیٹڈ کی فلمیں 2010ء کی دہائی کی بچوں کی مزاحیہ فلمیں 2010ء کی دہائی کی فنٹاسی فلمیں 2010ء کی دہائی کی مزاحیہ فلمیں 2017ء کی تھری ڈی فلمیں 2017ء کی فلمیں 2017ء کی کمپیوٹر اینیمیٹڈ فلمیں 2017ء کی مزاحیہ فلمیں آئی میکس فلمیں امریکی تھری ڈی فلمیں امریکی فلمیں امریکی کمپیوٹر اینیمیٹڈ فلمیں انگریزی زبان کی فلمیں تھری ڈی اینیمیٹڈ فلمیں جارجیا (امریکی ریاست) میں فلم سیٹ فلموں پر مبنی وڈیو گیم فلوریڈا میں فلم سیٹ کامنز زمرہ جس کا ربط ویکی ڈیٹا پر ہے لاس اینجلس میں فلم سیٹ والٹ ڈزنی پکچرز فلمیں دوستی کے بارے میں اینیمیٹڈ فلمیں 2010ء کی دہائی کی انگریزی زبان کی فلمیں
__label__ur سین-سینئر-سوس-آورانکھس ( فرانسیسی: Saint-Senier-sous-Avranches) فرانس کا ایک فرانسیسی کمیون جو Canton of Avranches میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات سین-سینئر-سوس-آورانکھس کا رقبہ 8.62 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 967 افراد پر مشتمل ہے اور 80 میٹر سطح دریا سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے فرانس فہرست فرانس کے شہر حوالہ جات Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur بارنسٹیڈ، نیو ہیمپشائر ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک قصبہ جو بیلنیپ کاؤنٹی، نیو ہیمپشائر میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات بارنسٹیڈ، نیو ہیمپشائر کا رقبہ 114.0 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 4,593 افراد پر مشتمل ہے اور 154 میٹر سطح سمندر سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا فہرست ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکہ کے شہر حوالہ جات نیو ہیمپشائر میں 1767ء کی تاسیسات نیو ہیمپشائر کے ٹاؤن بارنسٹیڈ، نیو ہیمپشائر
__label__ur یتھامفیتامین ایمفیٹامین سے اخذ کیا جانے والا ایک ذود اثر نشہ ہے۔ اسے چستی پیدا کرنے کے لیے کیا جاتا ہے۔ حوالہ جات بیرونی روابط Methamphetamine Toxnet entry Methamphetamine Poison Information Monograph Drug Trafficking: Aryan Brotherhood Methamphetamine Operation Dismantled، ایف بی آئی میتھامفیتامین جاپانی ایجادات 1893ء کی متعارفات Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur ہیڈلی، مغربی ورجینیا ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک انانکارپوریٹڈ کمیونٹی جو لنکن کاؤنٹی، مغربی ورجینیا میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا ریاستہائے متحدہ کے شہر حوالہ جات مغربی ورجینیا میں انانکارپوریٹڈ علاقے Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur ہافوے، کالووے کاؤنٹی، کینٹکی ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک انانکارپوریٹڈ کمیونٹی جو کالووے کاؤنٹی، کینٹکی میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات ہافوے، کالووے کاؤنٹی، کینٹکی کی مجموعی آبادی 160.02 میٹر سطح سمندر سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا ریاستہائے متحدہ کے شہر حوالہ جات کینٹکی میں انانکارپوریٹڈ علاقے
__label__ur نیڈل راک نیچرل علاقہ ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک پہاڑ جو کولوراڈو میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات نیڈل راک نیچرل علاقہ کی مجموعی آبادی 2,376.55 میٹر سطح سمندر سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا فہرست ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کے شہر حوالہ جات کولوراڈو جغرافیہ نامکمل کولوراڈو کے پہاڑ
__label__ur نیوپورٹ میونسپل ہوائی اڈا (اوریگون) ) ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک ہوائی اڈا جو اوریگون میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے اوریگون میں نقل و حمل اوریگون میں ہوائی اڈے حوالہ جات بیرونی روابط لنکن کاؤنٹی، اوریگون میں ہوائی اڈے
__label__ur فورٹ وین انٹرنیشنل ایئرپورٹ ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک ہوائی اڈا جو انڈیانا میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا فہرست ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کے شہر حوالہ جات 1941ء میں قائم ہونے والے ہوائی اڈے انڈیانا میں 1941ء کی تاسیسات انڈیانا میں ہوائی اڈے فورٹ وین، انڈیانا میں عمارات و ساخات کامنز زمرہ جس کا ربط ویکی ڈیٹا پر ہے Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur کنارتختہ ایران کا ایک شہر جو Kamaraj and Konartakhteh District میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات کنارتختہ کی مجموعی آبادی 6,690 افراد پر مشتمل ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ایران فہرست ایران کے شہر حوالہ جات ایران کے شہر صوبہ فارس کے شہر جغرافیہ شہرستان کازرون کے نامکمل مضامین Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur جنیوا، وسکونسن ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک قصبہ جو والورتھ کاؤنٹی، وسکونسن میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات جنیوا، وسکونسن کا رقبہ 79.8 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 4,099 افراد پر مشتمل ہے اور 309 میٹر سطح سمندر سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا ریاستہائے متحدہ کے شہر حوالہ جات وسکونسن کے ٹاؤن
__label__ur ایسے اوڈو (انگریزی: Ese Odo) نائجیریا کے اوندو ریاست کا مقامی حکومتی علاقہ ہے، جہاں مغربی اپوئی قبیلے اور اروگبو قبیلے کے آئزون نسلی ذیلی گروہ آباد ہیں۔ اس کا صدر دفتر اگبیکیبو قصبے میں ہے۔ اس مقامی حکومتی علاقے میں سب سے بڑے شہر اروگبو، ایگبوبینی، اگادگبا-اوبون اور ایگبیکیبو ہیں۔ اس کا رقبہ 762 کلومیٹر ہے اور 2006 مردم شماری میں اس کی آبادی 154,978 ہے۔ علاقے کا ڈاک اشاریہ رمز 352 ہے۔ حوالہ جات اوندو ریاست میں مقامی حکومتی علاقے ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل
__label__ur جنہووا سلووینیا کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو بلدیہ آپاچے میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات جنہووا کا رقبہ 2.81 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 38 افراد پر مشتمل ہے اور 248.6 میٹر سطح دریا سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے سلووینیا فہرست سلووینیا کے شہر حوالہ جات ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل
__label__ur پکا کھوہ ، پاکستان کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو یونین کونسل بیول، تحصیل گوجر خان، ضلع راولپنڈی ، پنجاب میں واقع ہے۔ اس گاؤں کی وجہ شہرت مغلیہ دور کی تعمیر شدہ مسجد المعروف پکی مسجد اور پکا کنواں (پکاکھوہ) ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے پاکستان فہرست پاکستان کے شہر حوالہ جات پنجاب، پاکستان کے اضلاع تحصیل گوجر خان کی یونین کونسلیں تحصیل گوجرخان کی یونین کونسلیں ضلع راولپنڈی ضلع راولپنڈی کی یونین کونسلیں ضلع راولپنڈی کے آباد مقامات مقالے جن میں انگریزی زبان کا متن ہے Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur کوٹ احمد خان پاکستان کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو ضلع سرگودھا میں واقع ہے۔ یہ ضلع سرگودھا کی ایک یونین کونسل بھی ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے پاکستان فہرست پاکستان کے شہر حوالہ جات جغرافیہ پنجاب (پاکستان) کے نامکمل مضامین ضلع سرگودھا کی یونین کونسلیں ضلع سرگودھا کے آباد مقامات
__label__ur گیانی عباد اللہ نے سکھ مذہب سے اسلام قبول کیا تھا۔ سکھوں سے متعلق کئی کتب تصنیف کیں۔ گرمکھی زبان میں قرآنِ کا ترجمہ کیا تھا۔ ابو الامان امرتسری ( عباد اللہ گیانی) احمدی اسلام سے تعلق رکھتے تھے۔ كتب ہمارا نانک ہندو دھرم گرو نانک جی کی سکھ عہدِ اسلامی میں بابا گرو نانک تے اسلام (پنجابی) حوالہ جات سکھ مت سے اسلام قبول کرنے والی شخصیات سابقہ سکھ نو مسلمین قبول اسلام بھارتی مسلم شخصیات بیرونی روابط
__label__ur تولی کاؤنٹی ( لاطینی: Toli County) چین کا ایک عوامی جمہوریہ چین کی کاؤنٹیاں جو تاچینگ پریفیکچر میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے چین فہرست چین کے شہر حوالہ جات سنکیانگ کی کاؤنٹی سطح تقسیمات Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur ماؤنٹ انبنئے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک پہاڑ جو Carbon County, Montana, U.S. میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات ماؤنٹ انبنئے کی مجموعی آبادی 3,636.61 میٹر سطح سمندر سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا فہرست ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کے شہر حوالہ جات مونٹانا جغرافیہ نامکمل مونٹانا کے پہاڑ
__label__ur سائیکی یونانیوں کی اسطوریات میں ایک حسین جمیل عورت کا ذکر آتا ہے۔ جس کا نام تھا سائیکی Psycheتھا۔ جو کوئی بھی اُسے دیکھتا اُس کا عاشق ہوجاتا۔ انسان تو انسان دیوتا بھی اُس کے عاشق ہوجاتے۔ کیوپڈ وینس کے بیٹے کا نام ہے، جسے محبت کا دیوتا بھی کہا جاتا ہے۔ کہانی وینس کو سائکی کے حسن کی وجہ سے اِس پر غصہ آیا اور اُس نے اپنے لڑکے کیوپڈ کو سائیکی کی گوشمالی پر مامور کیا۔ سائیکولوجی سائیکولوجی کی اصطلاح اِسی سائیکی سے لی گئی۔ یعنی وہ جو سائیکی دیوی کا شکار ہو گیا۔ رومن اساطیر قدیم لاطینی ادب یونانی علم الاساطیر کامنز زمرہ جس کا ربط ویکی ڈیٹا پر ہے عشقیہ داستانیں Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur چیس کاؤنٹی، نیبراسکا ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک کاؤنٹی جو نیبراسکا میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا فہرست ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکہ کے شہر حوالہ جات چیس کاؤنٹی، نیبراسکا نیبراسکا کاؤنٹیاں نیبراسکا میں 1886ء کی تاسیسات 1886ء میں آباد ہونے والے مقامات ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur ویسٹ منسٹر ملینیم پیئر (لاطینی: Westminster Millennium Pier) مملکت متحدہ کا ایک پن توڑ پشتہ جو ویسٹ منسٹر میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے مملکت متحدہ مملکت متحدہ کے شہروں کی فہرست حوالہ جات ویسٹمنسٹر شہر میں نقل و حمل لندن دریائی خدمات
__label__ur تقسیم ہند سے قبل جہلم سے تعلق رکھنے والے ریٹائرڈ سرکاری آفیسر لالہ گورن دتہ مل نے اپنے والد لالہ لدھا شاہ بندرا کی یاد میں ایک لائبریری قائم کی،برصغیر کی مشہور شخصیت ،پنجابی زبان کے مصنف اور تحریک آزادی کے رہنما لالہ لاجپت رائے کی قائم کردہ غیر منافع بخش تنظیم سرونٹس آف دی پیپل سوسائیٹی(Servansts of the Peoples Society) کے زیر انتظام اس کا نام لالہ لاجپت رائے لائبریری رکھا گیا جبکہ مرکزی ہال کا نام لالہ لدھا شاہ ہال رکھا گیا ،جس کا افتتاح ڈاکٹر گوپی چند بھارگو نے 3 مئی 1936ء کو کیا، قیام پاکستان کے بعد اسکو علامہ اقبال پبلک لائبریری جہلم کا نام سے منسوب کر دیا گیا، حوالہ جات حوالہ جات
__label__ur عامر حسین لون (پیدائش 1990) جموں اور کشمیر کے بجبہاڑہ گاؤں سے تعلق رکھنے والے ایک بے بازو کرکٹر ہیں۔ وہ ایک بازو کے بغیر کرکٹر اور جموں و کشمیر پیرا کرکٹ ٹیم کے کپتان کے طور پر جانا جاتا ہے۔ کیریئر لون نے 1997 میں 8 سال کی عمر میں اپنے خاندان کی آری مل کی وجہ سے اپنا ہاتھ کھو دیا۔ اس واقعہ کے باوجود، اس نے پھر بھی اپنی ٹانگوں سے کرکٹ کھیلنا شروع کیا اور جلد ہی اپنے منفرد اور اختراعی انداز کے لیے مشہور ہو گئے۔ 2013 میں، لون کی ٹیم دہلی میں کیرالہ کرکٹ ٹیم کے خلاف کھیلی۔ انہوں نے اپنی کارکردگی کی وجہ سے سرخیاں بنائیں، کیونکہ وہ اپنا بیٹ اپنی گردن اور ٹھوڑی کے درمیان رکھ کر اور ٹانگوں سے باؤلنگ کرنے کے قابل تھے۔ حوالہ جات جموں و کشمیر کے کرکٹ کھلاڑی
__label__ur تانڈا بند (Tanda Dam) ایک چھوٹا بند ہے جو ضلع کوہاٹ، پاکستان کے صوبے خیبر پختونخوا میں تانڈا جھیل پر واقع ہے۔ تانڈا جھیل بھی Ramsar کنونشن کی طرف سے ایک حفاظتی ویب سائٹ ہے۔ رامسر تحفظ اور wetlands کے پائیدار استعمال کے لیے ایک بین الاقوامی معاہدہ ہے۔ یہ 23 جولائی، 1976 پر Ramser سائٹس میں شامل کیا گیا تھا۔ یہ موسم سرما میں سائبیریا اور بحیرہ کیسپیئن سے منتقل پرندوں کی حفاظت کرتا ہے۔ حوالہ جات پاکستان کی جھیلیں پاکستان کے بند خیبر پختونخوا کے بند ضلع کوہاٹ
__label__ur ڈاگا (لاطینی: Daga) بھوٹان کا ایک آباد مقام جو گوشی گاؤں میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات ڈاگا کی مجموعی آبادی 1,146 افراد پر مشتمل ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے بھوٹان بھوٹان کے شہروں کی فہرست حوالہ جات بھوٹان کے آباد مقامات داگانا ضلع ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل
__label__ur بکھاری کلاں پاکستان کا ایک گاؤں جو پنجاب ضلع چکوال میں واقع ہے۔ بکھاری کلاں (ضلع چکوال کی یونین کونسل نمبر -27 ہے)۔ بکھاری کلاں چکوال شہر سے مغرب کی جانب تلہ گنگ روڈ پر تقریباً 22 کلومیٹر کے فاصلے پر واقع ہے، بکھاری کلاں کے مغرب میں کوٹیڑہ، پیر چٹے وٹے والا، شمال میں سدھر، منڈے، کرسال اور مارتھ مشرق میں ڈھوک سیال، ڈھوک میکن، ماڑی، تھوہا بہادر اور ہستال جبکہ جنوب میں بلکسر ڈھوک پپلی، چھچھاڑاں والی، ولانہ، پیر جھنگی والا، ڈھوک کمال، بھٹی گجر اور ڈھوک بخشی واقع ہیں۔ یہ تلہ گنگ روڈ پر چکوال سے 14 کلو میٹر پر ہے مزید دیکھیے پاکستان فہرست پاکستان کے شہر حوالہ جات ضلع چکوال کی یونین کونسلیں ضلع چکوال کے آباد مقامات
__label__ur لائٹری-سوس-امانس ( فرانسیسی: Laître-sous-Amance) فرانس کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو لورین (علاقہ) میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات لائٹری-سوس-امانس کا رقبہ 5.11 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 389 افراد پر مشتمل ہے اور 280 میٹر سطح دریا سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے فرانس فہرست فرانس کے شہر حوالہ جات Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur ماؤنٹ ٹریمپر ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک پہاڑ جو نیویارک میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات ماؤنٹ ٹریمپر کی مجموعی آبادی 835.16 میٹر سطح سمندر سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا فہرست ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کے شہر حوالہ جات نیو یارک کے پہاڑ کامنز زمرہ جس کا ربط ویکی ڈیٹا پر ہے Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur اوسکالوسا ٹاؤن شپ، کلے کاؤنٹی، الینوائے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک ٹاؤن شپ جو کلے کاؤنٹی، الینوائے میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات اوسکالوسا ٹاؤن شپ، کلے کاؤنٹی، الینوائے کی مجموعی آبادی 322 افراد پر مشتمل ہے اور 162 میٹر سطح سمندر سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا فہرست ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کے شہر حوالہ جات الینوائے میں 1861ء کی تاسیسات کلے کاؤنٹی، الینوائے میں ٹاؤن شپ الینوائے کے ٹاؤن شپ Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur سینٹ-ہرمنگلدے، کیوبک کینیڈا کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو Coaticook Regional County Municipality میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات سینٹ-ہرمنگلدے، کیوبک کا رقبہ 168.80 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 702 افراد پر مشتمل ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے کینیڈا فہرست کینیڈا کے شہر حوالہ جات ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل
__label__ur دودیا ریلوے اسٹیشن راجستھان، بھارت میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریلوے اسٹیشن انڈین ریلویز پاکستان ریلویز حوالہ جات بیرونی روابط انڈین ریلوے کی ویب سائٹ بھارت کے ریلوے اسٹیشن بھارت میں ریل نقل و حمل راجستھان کے ریلوے اسٹیشن
__label__ur ریزیڈینسی، لکھنؤ بھارت کی ریاست اترپردیش کے شہر لکھنؤ میں متعدد عمارتوں کا ایک گروپ ہے۔ یہ برطانوی ریذیڈنٹ جنرل کی رہائش گاہ تھی جو نواب کے دربار میں نمائندہ تھا۔ ریذیڈنسی شہر کے وسط میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے لکھنؤ کا محاصرہ حوالہ جات برطانوی ہند کی ریزیڈینسیاں بھارت مملکت متحدہ تعلقات بھارت میں کھنڈر لکھنؤ کی عمارات و ساخات ہندوستان میں 1780ء کی تاسیسات Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur حناہ یا حنان سوریہ کے حاکم کورنیس نے اسے 6ء میں سردار کاہن مقرر کیا جب اُس کی عمر 37 سال تھی۔ 15ء میں یہودیہ کے حاکم گراتُس نے اسے عہدہ سے برطرف کر دیا۔ اُس کے پانچ بیٹے بھی سردار کاہن بنے۔ اس کا داماد کائفا بھی سردار کاہن مقرر ہوا۔ اسے اور کائفا دونوں کو یوحنا پبتسمہ دینے والے کی خدمت کے آغاز میں سردار کاہن کہا گیا ہے۔ یہ شاید اس لیے کہ حناہ کا خاندان سربراہ ہونے کی وجہ سے ابھی تک بار سوخ تھا اور سردار کاہن کہلاتا تھا۔ یہی وجہ تھی کہ جب یسوع کو گرفتار کیا گیا تو پہلے اُسے حناہ کے پاس لے گئے اور بعد میں باندھ کر سردار کاہن کائفا کے پاس بھیجا۔ اور شاید اسی وجہ سے حناہ کو اعمال 4: 6 میں سردار کاہن کہا گیا ہے جب پطرس اور یوحنا کو گرفتار کیا گیا حالانکہ اس وقت حقیقت میں کائفا ہی سردار کاہن تھا۔ حوالہ جات پہلی صدی کی یہودی شخصیات رسولوں کے اعمال کی شخصیات پہلی صدی ق م کی یہودی شخصیات اناجیل اربعہ کی شخصیات پہلی صدی میں مذہبی رہنما ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل
__label__ur چامولوک ترکی کا ایک فہرست ترکی کے اضلاع جو صوبہ گریسون میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات چامولوک کی مجموعی آبادی 1,140 میٹر سطح سمندر سے بلندی پر واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ترکی فہرست ترکی کے شہر حوالہ جات اضلاع گریسون صوبہ ترکی میں قصبے گریسون صوبہ کے آباد مقامات Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur ینگجنگ کاؤنٹی چین کا ایک عوامی جمہوریہ چین کی کاؤنٹیاں جو یآن میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات ینگجنگ کاؤنٹی کا رقبہ 1,781 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 140,000 افراد پر مشتمل ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے چین فہرست چین کے شہر حوالہ جات سیچوان کی کاؤنٹی سطح تقسیمات
__label__ur شاریال زیریں پاکستان کا ایک رہائشی علاقہ جو خیبر پختونخوا میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے پاکستان فہرست پاکستان کے شہر حوالہ جات ضلع کوہستان ضلع کوہستان کے آباد مقامات ضلع کوہستان کی یونین کونسلیں خیبر پختونخوا کی یونین کونسلیں کوہستان ضلع، پاکستان کی یونین کونسلیں ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل
__label__ur یونیورسٹی اوریئنٹل کالج (کلیۃ الشرقیہ) میں ہندی وبھاگ 1983ء میں قائم ہوا جب پنجاب یونیورسٹی لاہور میں ہندی کے سرٹیفکیٹ/ڈپلوما کا آغاز کیا گیا، وہاں پوسٹ گریجویشن کے لیے نصاب ترتیب دیا جا چکا ہے لیکن ابھی تک ہندی زبان و ادب کا ڈپلوما پروگرام جدید تدریسی انداز میں بہترین طریقہ کار سے چلایا جا رہا ہے حوالہ جات جامعہ پنجاب پنجاب پنجاب
__label__ur روکاس، کاپیز فلپائن کا ایک شہر جو کاپیز میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات روکاس، کاپیز کا رقبہ 95.07 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 156,197 افراد پر مشتمل ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے فلپائن فہرست فلپائن کے شہر حوالہ جات 1693ء میں آباد ہونے والے مقامات فلپائن کے علاقائی دار الحکومت کاپیز کے آباد مقامات فلپائن سانچے صفحات مع گراف Short description is different from Wikidata فلپائن کے بندرگاہ شہر اور ٹاؤن
__label__ur قانون شکن پنجابی زبان میں فلم کا آغاز کیا۔ فلم كى نمائش 25 ستمبر، 1981ء كو ہوئى۔ پاکستانی اس فلم کا کریکٹر ایکشن اور جرائم فلموں کے بارے میں فلم کی تکمیل کی گی ہیں۔ اس فلم کے ہدایتکار قریش چوہدری تھے۔ فلمساز تیار کردہ تھے سید شاکر علی شاہ۔ فلم کے اداکاروں میں سے منفرد کردار دیکھے سلطان راہی، آسیہ، افضال احمد، بہار تھے۔ 1980ء کی دہائی کی فلمیں پاکستانی فلمیں ایکشن فلمیں پاکستانی ایکشن فلمیں جرم فلمیں قتل پر فلمیں لولی وڈ ہراسانی متعلقہ فلمیں پنجابی زبان کی فلمیں 1981ء کی پاکستانی فلمیں
__label__ur کومی (Komi) ایک نسلی گروہ ہے جن کی آبائی سر زمین شمال مشرقی یورپی روس ہے۔ ان کی اکثریت روسی وفاق کی کومی جمہوریہ، پیرم کرائی، مورمانسک اوبلاست، خانتی-مانسی خود مختار آکرگ اور یامالو-نینیتس خود مختار آکرگ میں مقیم ہے۔ حوالہ جات کومی قوم تاریخ اورال جدید خانہ بدوش روس کے نسلی گروہ یوریشیائی خانہ بدوش ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل
__label__ur فیئر اوکس، فیئرفیکس کاؤنٹی، ورجینیا ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کا ایک مردم شماری نامزد مقام جو فیئرفیکس کاؤنٹی، ورجینیا میں واقع ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا فہرست ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکہ کے شہر حوالہ جات واشنگٹن میٹروپولیٹن علاقہ کامنز زمرہ جس کا ربط ویکی ڈیٹا پر ہے Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur حسن لغیرہ کی تعریف حسن لغیرہ ایسی حدیث جس کے راویوں میں باقی صحیح کی شرائط موجود ہوں لیکن ضبط کی کمی ہو اور یہ متعدد طُرُق (اسناد) سے روایت کی گئی ہو۔ اس کے ضعیف ہونے کا سبب راوی کا فاسق یا جھوٹا ہونا نہ ہو۔ اس تعریف سے ہم یہ اخذ کر سکتے ہیں کہ ضعیف حدیث، حسن لغیرہ کے درجے تک دو امور کے باعث ترقی پا سکتی ہے: · یہ کسی اور سند سے روایت کی گئی ہو اور دوسری سند، پہلی جیسی ہی یا اس سے زیادہ قوی ہو۔ · حدیث کے ضعیف ہونے کا سبب راوی کا کچا حافظہ، سند کا منقطع ہونا اور راوی کا بے خبر ہونا ہو (یعنی راوی پر جھوٹا یا فاسق ہونے کا الزام نہ لگایا گیا ہو۔) حسن لغیرہ کا درجہ حسن لغیرہ، حسن لذاتہ کی نسبت کم درجے کی حدیث ہے۔ اسی پر بنیاد رکھتے ہوئے کہا جا سکتا ہے کہ اگر حسن لغیرہ اور حسن لذاتہ میں کچھ تعارض (اختلاف) پایا جائے تو حسن لذاتہ کو ترجیح دی جائے گی۔ حسن لغیرہ کا حکم نتائج اخذ کرنے کے لیے یہ قابل قبول کے درجے پر ہے۔ حوالہ جات اصطلاحات حدیث
__label__ur میری کیٹ آلسن ریاستہائے متحدہ امریکا کی ایک فلمی اداکارہ ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے فہرست امریکی فلمی اداکارائیں امریکی سنیما حوالہ جات 1986ء کی پیدائشیں اکیسویں صدی کی امریکی اداکارائیں اکیسویں صدی کی امریکی مصنفات اکیسویں صدی کے امریکی مصنفین امریکی فلم پروڈیوسر امریکی فلمی اداکارائیں امریکی کاروباری شخصیات امریکی مصنفات امریکی ٹیلی ویژن اداکارائیں انگریز نژاد امریکی شخصیت بقید حیات شخصیات بیسویں صدی کی امریکی اداکارائیں ریاستہائے متحدہ کی جڑواں شخصیات شیرمین اوکس، لاس اینجلس کی اداکارائیں لاس اینجلس، کیلیفورنیا کے مصنفین ماخذ میں نامکمل اندراجات امریکی خواتین فلم پروڈیوسرز امریکی اداکارہ بچیاں لاس اینجلس کی اداکارائیں نارویجن نژاد امریکی شخصیات امریکی فیشن ڈیزائنر امریکی خواتین فیشن ڈیزائنر نیو یارک یونیورسٹی گیلاٹن اسکول برائے انفرادی مطالعہ کے فضلا ویکی ڈیٹا سے مطابقت رکھنے والی مختصر تفصیل
__label__ur واز ( فرانسیسی: Oise) فرانس کا ایک فرانس کے محکمے جو پیکارڈی میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات واز کا رقبہ 5,860 مربع کیلومیٹر ہے اور اس کی مجموعی آبادی 816,142 افراد پر مشتمل ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے فرانس فہرست فرانس کے شہر حوالہ جات فرانس کے محکمہ جات 1790ء میں قائم ہونے والے ممالک اور علاقے صفحات مع گراف Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur جوراسک پارک (انگریزی: Jurassic Park)، (عربی: الحديقة الجوراسية) 1990ء میں شائع ہونے والا سائنسی افسانہ ہے جو امریکی مؤلّف مائیکل کرائیٹون نے لکھا تھا۔ مزید دیکھے دی لوسٹ ورلڈ (جوراسک پارک ناول) جزائر پر ہونے والے واقعات پر ناول 1990ء کے امریکی ناول
__label__ur سہلاباد، مشرقی آذربائیجان ایران کا ایک گاؤں جو Kaghazkonan-e Shomali Rural District میں واقع ہے۔ تفصیلات سہلاباد، مشرقی آذربائیجان کی مجموعی آبادی 107 افراد پر مشتمل ہے۔ مزید دیکھیے ایران فہرست ایران کے شہر حوالہ جات جغرافیہ شہرستان میانہ کے نامکمل مضامین Short description is different from Wikidata
__label__ur جنٹلمین بمقابلہ کھلاڑی انگلش فرسٹ کلاس کرکٹ میچوں کی ایک طویل عرصے سے جاری سیریز تھی۔ 1806ء میں دو میچ کھیلے گئے، لیکن 1819ء تک یہ میچ دوبارہ نہیں کھیلا گیا، اور اس کے بعد، یہ 1962ء تک کھیلا گیا، عام طور پر ہر موسم گرما میں دو بار (حالانکہ کبھی کبھی تین یا چار بار) سوائے 1826ء 1828ء 1915-1918ء (بطور وجہ) پہلی جنگ عظیم تک) اور 1940-1945ء (دوسری جنگ عظیم کی وجہ سے)۔ خلاصہ یہ کہ یہ شوقیہ (جنٹلمین) اور پیشہ ور کرکٹرز (کھلاڑیوں) پر مشتمل ٹیموں کے درمیان ایک میچ تھا جو 19ویں صدی کے انگلش کلاس ڈھانچے سے ابھرا: کھلاڑی محنت کش طبقے کے کرکٹرز تھے جنہوں نے کھیل کے ذریعے اپنی روزی کمائی، جب کہ جنٹلمین درمیانی اور اعلیٰ طبقے کے کرکٹ کھلاڑی تھے، جو عام طور پر پبلک اسکول سسٹم کی پیداوار تھے، جو تفریح کے لیے کھیلتے تھے۔ حوالہ جات مملکت متحدہ میں معاشرتی طبقات
__label__ur آئرین ڈورس "ڈاٹ" لافٹن (پیدائش:29 ستمبر 1913ءایڈیلیڈ، جنوبی آسٹریلیا)|وفات: 8 مارچ 1982ءایڈیلیڈ، جنوبی آسٹریلیا) 1930ء کی دہائی کے دوران 1953ء میں ریٹائرمنٹ تک کرکٹ اور فیلڈ ہاکی میں آسٹریلیا اور جنوبی آسٹریلیا کی نمائندگی کرنے والی جنوبی آسٹریلیا کی ایک اعلی درجے کی کھلاڑی تھیں۔ کرکٹ میں، لافٹن نے گھریلو سطح پر فرسٹ کلاس کرکٹ میں 40 سنچریاں اسکور کیں اور 1949ء میں 390 کا عالمی ریکارڈ بنایا۔ ایک ریاستی کپتان، انہیں 1951ء میں آسٹریلیا کے دورہ انگلینڈ کے لیے منتخب کیا گیا جہاں اس نے اپنی واحد پیشی سے 47 رنز بنائے۔ ایک ایوارڈ 'دی ڈاٹ لافٹن ٹرافی' شاندار جنوبی آسٹریلیا کی خواتین کرکٹرز کو دیا جاتا ہے۔ فیلڈ ہاکی میں، وہ 1947ء میں نیوزی لینڈ کے خلاف سیریز میں آسٹریلیا کے لیے لیفٹ فل بیک کے طور پر منتخب ہوئیں۔ وفات 08 مارچ 1982، ایڈیلیڈ، جنوبی آسٹریلیا، (عمر 68 سال 160 ڈی) مزید دیکھیے خواتین کی کرکٹ خواتین کی ٹیسٹ کرکٹ آسٹریلیا قومی خواتین کرکٹ ٹیم آسٹریلیا خواتین ٹیسٹ کرکٹ کھلاڑیوں کی فہرست حوالہ جات آسٹریلیا کی خواتین ٹیسٹ کرکٹ کھلاڑی 1982ء کی وفیات 1913ء کی پیدائشیں آسٹریلوی خواتین کرکٹ کھلاڑی
__label__ur 1460 (عدد) یعنی 1460 ایک عدد اور ایک علامت ہے۔ کچھ عددی نظاموں میں 1459 سے بڑا یا زیادہ اور 1461 سے چھوٹا یا کم ہوتا ہے۔ گنتی میں اسے ایک ہزار چار سو ساٹھ یا چودہ سو ساٹھ بولا جاتا ہے۔ اور اس سے پہلے ایک ہزار چار سو انسٹھ یا چودہ سو انسٹھ اور اس کے بعد ایک ہزار چار سو اکسٹھ یا چودہ سو اکسٹھ بولا جاتا ہے۔ انفرادی خصوصیات عمومی خصوصیات حوالہ جات ابتدائی حساب صحیح اعداد
__label__ur میں میلان میں رہتا ہوں۔
__label__ur وہ سونے چلا گیا ہے کیونکہ وہ تھکا ہوا تھا.
__label__ur تمھیں دکان سڑک کے کونے میں ملے گی۔
__label__ur او چشمان زیبائی دارد.
__label__ur روشنی کو بند کر دیں۔
__label__ur ٹکٹ ۱۰۰۰ ین سے کم کی نہیں ملے گی۔
__label__ur اس کی فطرت میں دوسروں کی برائی کرنا نہیں ہے۔
__label__ur ٹام نے دو ہفتوں سے اپنے بال نہیں دھوئے۔
__label__ur آج میں نے ایک بلی کو پیار کیا۔
__label__ur دور کے ڈھول سہانے۔
__label__ur معاف کیجئیے گا، کیا وقت ہوا ہے؟
__label__ur تم میری زندگی کے سب سے زیادہ اہم شخص ہو۔
__label__ur در حال حاضر مشکلات ایمیلی دارم.
__label__ur ٹام نے مریم کو ایک نوٹ پکرایا۔
__label__ur وہ تھکا ہوا تھا مگر وہ پھر بھی کام کرتا رہا۔
__label__ur سیمسٹر امتہان آخرکار ختم ہو گئے ہیں۔
__label__ur شور ناقابل برداشت ہے
__label__ur کیا ہمیں اس کے لئے انتظار کرنے کی ضرورت ہے؟
__label__ur وہ ۵ بجے واپس آیا ہے۔
__label__ur میرے پیچھے آئے۔
__label__ur یہ بلکل صحیح جواب ہے۔
__label__ur اس نے سب کچھ جیت لیا۔
__label__ur میرا سائنس پڑھنے کا موڈ نہیں ہو رہا۔
__label__ur براہ کرم مجھے آٹھ بجے فون کر کے اٹھا دیجیے گا۔
__label__ur ان کو اپنی قسمت قبول کرنا پڑی۔
__label__ur میں لفٹ سے نیچے چلا گیا
__label__ur یوکو انگریزی بولتی ہے، ہے نا؟
__label__ur مجھے کسی بھی چیز سے ڈر نہیں لگتا۔
__label__ur بۈگۈن شەنبە.
__label__ur مجھے آپ سے پیار ہے۔
__label__ur اس نے اپنا ہوم ورک ایک گھنٹے میں ختم کر لیا۔
__label__ur ابھی بہت سارے کام رہتے ہیں۔
__label__ur ئۇ ئىت چوڭ.
__label__ur تم یہاں اتنی رات کو کیا کر رہے ہو؟
__label__ur یہ صحیح جواب نہیں ہے۔
__label__ur پیانو کافی مہنگا ہے۔
__label__ur آگ میں ۱۳ زندگیاں ضائع ہو گئی۔
__label__ur اس کی خاموشی نے لڑکی کو ناراض کر دیا تھا۔
__label__ur کوئی بھی بچہ نہیں بیٹھا ہوا۔
__label__ur کیا ہو رہا ہیں؟
__label__ur میں اس سے پیار کرتا تھا مگر اب نہیں۔
__label__ur تمہارے پاس تین بلیاں ہیں۔
__label__ur انہوں نے لڑکے کو ڈوبنے سے بچا لیا۔
__label__ur مجھے امتہان سے پہلے ایک انٹرویو دینا پڑے گا۔
__label__ur وہ ہر روز چیزیں خریدنے کے لئے بازار جاتی ہے۔
__label__ur ميري آنکهون کا نور ...أور سر کا تاج.
__label__ur دوسری صدی عیسوی میں چین میں فٹبال کھیلی جاتی تھی۔
__label__ur آپ کیسے ہیں؟
__label__ur مجھے مشورہ دو۔
__label__ur بی رنگ سبز خیالات شدت سے سوتی ہیں.
__label__ur کتابیں پڑھ کے اسے بہت خوشی ملتی ہے۔
__label__ur جم اور نینسی کدھر ہیں؟
__label__ur بس تھوڑی دور ہے۔
__label__ur میرا نہیں خیال تھا کہ تم اتنے بوڑھے ہو گے۔
__label__ur مجھے کنیڈا گئے ہوئے کافی عرصہ ہو گیا ہے۔
__label__ur میں اس سے لندن ملا تھا جب میں وہاں رہ رہا تھا۔
__label__ur وہ واقعی بہت خوبصورت لگ رہی ہے۔
__label__ur ولڈر صاحب نے مجھے تمھارا ای میل اڈریس دیا تھا۔
__label__ur یہ ایک بالکل نیا پڑوڈکٹ ہے۔
__label__ur ئۇ قىسقا چاچلىق.
__label__ur تمھیں جتنے پیسے چاہئے، میں اتنے تمھیں دے دوں گا۔
__label__ur اس کے پاس ابھی تک اس نوکری کے لیے تجربہ نہیں ہے۔
__label__ur میں اس کے خیال سے اتفاق کرتا ہوں۔
__label__ur میں ان کے خیال سے اتفاق کرتا ہوں۔
__label__ur کیا ہوٹل ہوائی اڈے کے قریب ہے؟
__label__ur ٹام نے مریم سے پوچھا کہ وہ کیوں ہنس رہی ہے۔
__label__ur جو لڑکی پیانو بجا رہی ہے وہ میری بہن ہے۔
__label__ur میں سمجھ آگئی ہے کہ اس مسئلہ کو کیسے حل کرنا ہے۔
__label__ur اس کی آنکھیں خوبصورت ہیں۔
__label__ur اس پھل کا ذائقہ خراب ہے۔
__label__ur میں ابھی بھی مصروف ہوں۔
__label__ur بس تھوڑا سا صبر اور۔
__label__ur گرم موسم میں پانی جلد اڑ جاتا ہے۔
__label__ur دروازہ کون کھلا چھوڑ گیا تھا؟
__label__ur جی ہاں.
__label__ur میرے پاس اس سے تین گنا زیادہ کتابیں ہیں۔
__label__ur چاول گرم ممالک میں اگتا ہے۔
__label__ur میرا بھائی ٹینس میں کبھی نہیں ہارا ہے
__label__ur وہ تھکا ہوا تھا اس لئے وہ سونے چلا گیا ہے۔
__label__ur میں تمھیں سچ بتا رہا ہوں۔
__label__ur وہ سوچ میں ڈوبا ہوا تھا۔
__label__ur وہ ایک اچھے خاندان سے تعلق رکھتی ہے۔
__label__ur اس کے ریاضی میں اچھے نمبر آئے ہیں۔
__label__ur با او تلفنی حرف زدم.
__label__ur پیرس کے مقابلے میں لندن بہت بڑا ہے۔
__label__ur استاد نے میری پیٹھ پر مجھے تھپکی دی۔
__label__ur میں تھکا ہوا تھا اسی لئے میں سونے چلا گیا۔
__label__ur بۇ ئۆي بەك ياخشى.
__label__ur آپ کا بہت شکریہ!
__label__ur میں اگلے ہفتے سپین جا رہا ہوں۔
__label__ur تمام انسان آزاد اور حقوق و عزت کے اعتبار سے برابر پیدا ہوۓ ہیں۔ انہیں ضمیر اور عقل ودیعت ہوئی ہی۔ اسلۓ انہیں ایک دوسرے کے ساتھ بھائیچارے کا سلوک کرنا چاہیۓ۔
__label__ur درخواست دہندگان سے گزارش ہے کہ وہ خود آکے اپنی درخواست جمع کرائے۔
__label__ur اگر تم کال کرنا چاہتے ہو تو مجھے دوپہر کو کر لے نا۔
__label__ur اگر آپ کال کرنا چاہتے ہیں تو مجھے دوپہر کو کر لی جئے گا۔
__label__ur بہرے لوگ اکثر ایک دوسرے سے نشانی زبان میں بات کرتے ہیں۔
__label__ur جب بارش رکی تھی تو وہ چہل قدمی کے لیے باہر چلا گیا تھا۔
__label__ur زچّہ اور بچّہ خصوصی توجہ اور امداد کے حقدار ہیں۔ تمام بچے، خواہ وہ شادی سے پہلے پیدا ہوئے ہوں یا شادی کے بعد، معاشرتی تحفّظ سے یکساں طور پر مستفید ہوں گے۔
__label__ur اس کے علاوہ جس علاقے یا ملک سے جو شخص تعلق رکھتا ہے اس کی سیاسی کیفیت دائرہ اختیار یا بین الاقوامی حیثیت کی بنا پر اس سے کوئی امتیازی سلوک نہیں کیا جائے گا۔ چاہے وہ ملک یا علاقہ آزاد ہو یا تولیتی ہو یا غیر مختار ہو یا سیاسی اقتدار کے لحاظ سے کسی دوسری بندش کا پابند ہو۔
__label__ur قانون کی نظر میں سب برابر ہیں اور بغیر کسی تفریق کے قانون کے اندر امان پانے کے برابر کے حقدار ہیں۔ اس اعلان کی خلاف ورزی میں جو تفریق کی جائے یا تفریق کے لیے ترغیب دی جائے، اس سے سب برابر کے بچاؤ کے حقدار ہیں۔
__label__ur یہ حق ان عدالتی کارروائیوں سے بچنے کے لیے استعمال میں نہیں لایا جا سکتا جو خالصتاً غیر سیاسی جرائم یا ایسے افعال کی وجہ سے عمل میں آتی ہیں جو اقوامِ متحدہ کے مقاصد اور اُصولوں کے خلاف ہیں۔
__label__ur چونکہ یہ بہت ضروری ہے کہ انسانی حقوق کو قانون کی عملداری کے ذریعے محفوظ رکھا جائے۔ اگر ہم یہ نہیں چاہتے کہ انسان عاجز آ کر جبر اور استبداد کے خلاف بغاوت کرنے پر مجبور ہوں،
__label__ur ہر شخص کو اپنی رائے رکھنے اور اظہارِ رائے کی آزادی کا حق حاصل ہے۔ اس حق میں یہ امر بھی شامل ہے کہ وہ آزادی کے ساتھ اپنی رائے قائم کرے اور جس ذریعے سے چاہے بغیر ملکی سرحدوں کا خیال کئے علم اور خیالات کی تلاش کرے۔ انہیں حاصل کرے اور ان کی تبلیغ کرے۔
__label__ur اس اعلان کی کسی چیز سے کوئی ایسی بات مراد نہیں لی جا سکتی جس سے کسی ملک، گروہ یا شخص کو کسی ایسی سرگرمیوں میں مصروف ہونے یا کسی ایسے کام کو انجام دینے کا حق پیدا ہو جس کا منشا ان حقوق اور آزادیوں کی تخریب ہو جو یہاں پیش کی گئی ہیں۔چونکہ ہر انسان کی ذاتی عزت اور حرمت اور انسانوں کے مساوی اور ناقابلِ انتقال حقوق کو تسلیم کرنا دنیا میں آزادی، انصاف، اور امن کی بنیاد ہے،
__label__ur چونکہ انسانی حقوق سے لاپروائی اور ان کی بے حرمتی اکثر ایسے وحشیانہ افعال کی شکل میں ظاہر ہوئی ہے جن سے انسانیت کے ضمیر کو سخت صدمے پہنچے ہیں اور عام انسانوں کی بلند ترین آرزو یہ رہی ہے کہ ایسی دنیا وجود میں آئے جس میں تمام انسانوں کو اپنی بات کہنے اور اپنے عقیدے پر قائم رہنے کی آزادی حاصل ہو اور خوف اور احتیاج سے محفوظ رہیں،
__label__ur قانون کی نظر میں سب برابر ہیں اور سب بغیر کسی تفریق کے قانون کے اندر امان پانے کے برابر کے حقدار ہیں۔ اس اعلان کے خلاف جو تفریق کی جائے یا جس تفریق کے لئے ترغیب دی جائے، اس سے سب برابر کے بچاؤ کے حقدار ہیں۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو اپنی اور اپنے اہل و عیال کی صحت اور فلاح و بہبود کے لیے مناسب معیارِ زندگی کا حق حاصل ہے جس میں خوراک، پوشاک، مکان، اور علاج کی سہولتیں، اور دوسری ضروری معاشرتی مراعات شامل ہیں؛ اور بے روزگاری، بیماری، معذوری، بیوگی، بڑھاپا، یا ایسے حالات میں روزگار سے محرومی جو اس کے قبضۂ قدرت سے باہر ہوں، کے خلاف تحفّظ کا حق حاصل ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص ان تمام آزادیوں اور حقوق کا مستحق ہے جو اس اعلان میں بیان کئے گئے ہیں، اور اس حق پر نسل، رنگ، جنس، زبان، مذہب اور سیاسی تفریق کا یا کسی قسم کے عقیدے، قوم، معاشرے، دولت یا خاندانی حیثیت وغیرہ کا کوئی اثر نہ پڑے گا۔
__label__ur اپنی آزادیوں اور حقوق سے فائدہ اٹھانے میں ہر شخص صرف ایسی حدود کا پابند ہو گا جو دوسروں کی آزادیوں اور حقوق کو تسلیم کرانے اور ان کا احترام کرانے کی غرض سے، یا جمہوری نظام میں اخلاق، امن عامّہ، اور عام فلاح و بہبود کے مناسب لوازمات کو پورا کرنے کے لیے قانون کی طرف سے عائد کی گئی ہیں۔
__label__ur چونکہ ممبر ملکوں نے یہ عہد کر لیا ہے کہ وہ اقوامِ متحدہ کے اشتراکِ عمل سے ساری دنیا میں اصولاً اور عملاً انسانی حقوق اور بنیادی آزادیوں کا زیادہ سے زیادہ احترام کریں گے اور کرائیں گے،
__label__ur ہر انسان کو آزادیٔ فکر، آزادیٔ ضمیر، اور آزادیٔ مذہب کا پورا حق حاصل ہے۔ اس حق میں مذہب یا عقیدے کو تبدیل کرنے اور کُھلے عام یا نجی طور پر، تنہا یا دوسروں کے ساتھ مل جل کر عقیدے کی تبلیغ، عمل، عبادت، اور مذہبی رسمیں پوری کرنے کی آزادی بھی شامل ہے۔
__label__ur عوام کی مرضی حکومت کے اقتدار کی بنیاد ہو گی۔ یہ مرضی وقتاً فوقتاً ایسے حقیقی انتخابات کے ذریعے ظاہر کی جائے گی جو عام اور مساوی رائے دہندگی سے ہوں گے اور جو خفیہ ووٹ یا اس کے مساوی کسی دوسرے آزادانہ طریقِ رائے دہندگی کے مطابق عمل میں آئیں گے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص جو کام کرتا ہے، ایسے مناسب و معقول مشاہرے کا حق رکھتا ہے جو خود اس کے اور اس کے اہل و عیال کے لیے باعزت زندگی کا ضامن ہو، اور جس میں اگر ضروری ہو تو معاشرتی تحفّظ کے دیگر ذرائع سے اضافہ کیا جا سکے۔
__label__ur انسانی حقوق کا یہ عالمی منشور تمام اقوام کے واسطے حصولِ مقصد کا مشترک معیار ہو گا تاکہ ہر فرد اور معاشرے کا ہر ادارہ اس منشور کو ہمیشہ پیش نظر رکھتے ہوئے تعلیم و تبلیغ کے ذریعہ ان حقوق اور آزادیوں کا احترام پیدا کرے اور انہیں قومی اور بین الاقوامی کارروائیوں کے ذریعے ممبر ملکوں میں اور اُن قوموں میں جو ممبر ملکوں کے ماتحت ہوں، منوانے کے لئے بتدریج کوشش کر سکے۔
__label__ur ایسے ہر شخص کو جس پر کوئی فوجداری کا الزام عائد کیا جائے، بے گناہ شمار کئے جانے کا حق ہے تاوقتیکہ اس پر کھلی عدالت میں قانون کے مطابق جرم ثابت نہ ہو جائے اور اسے اپنی صفائی پیش کرنے کا پورا موقع نہ دیا جا چکا ہو۔
__label__ur ہر ایک شخص کو یکساں طور پر حق حاصل ہے کہ اس کے حقوق و فرائض کا تعین یا اس کے خلاف کسی عائد کردہ جرم کے بارے میں مقدمہ کی سماعت آزاد اور غیر جانب دار عدالت کے کھلے اجلاس میں منصفانہ طریقے پر ہو۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو حق حاصل ہے کہ اس کے اُن اخلاقی اور مادّی مفادات کا تحفّظ کیا جائے جو اسے ایسی سائنسی، علمی، یا ادبی تصنیف سے، جس کا وہ مصنف ہے، حاصل ہوتے ہیں۔
__label__ur ہر شخص ان تمام آزادیوں اور حقوق کا مستحق ہے جو اس اعلان میں بیان کیے گئے ہیں، اور اس حق پر نسل، رنگ، جنس، زبان، مذہب، اور سیاسی تفریق کا یا کسی قسم کے عقیدے، قوم، معاشرے، دولت، یا خاندانی حیثیت وغیرہ کا کوئی اثر نہ پڑے گا۔
__label__ur تعلیم کا مقصد انسانی شخصیت کی پوری نشوونما ہو گا۔ اور وہ انسانی حقوق اور بنیادی آزادیوں کے احترام میں اضافہ کرنے کا ذریعہ ہو گی۔ وہ تمام قوموں اور نسلی یا مذہبی گروہوں کے درمیان باہمی مفاہمت، رواداری اور دوستی کو ترقی دے گی اور امن کو برقرار رکھنے کے لئے اقوامِ متحدہ کی سرگرمیوں کو آگے بڑھائے گی۔
__label__ur تمام انسان آزاد اور حقوق و عزت کے اعتبار سے برابر پیدا ہوئے ہیں۔ انہیں ضمیر اور عقل ودیعت ہوئی ہے۔ اس لیے انہیں ایک دوسرے کے ساتھ بھائی چارے کا سلوک کرنا چاہیے۔
__label__ur معاشرے کے رکن کی حیثیت سے ہر شخص کو معاشرتی تحفّظ کا حق حاصل ہے اور یہ حق بھی کہ وہ ملک کے نظام اور وسائل کے مطابق قومی کوشش اور بین الاقوامی تعاون سے ایسے اقتصادی، معاشرتی، اور ثقافتی حقوق کو حاصل کرے، جو اس کی عزت اور شخصیت کی آزادانہ نشوونما کے لیے لازم ہیں۔
__label__ur چونکہ اقوامِ متحدہ کی ممبر قوموں نے اپنے چارٹر میں بنیادی انسانی حقوق، انسانی شخصیت کی حرمت اور قدر، اور مردوں اور عورتوں کے مساوی حقوق کے بارے میں اپنے یقین کی دوبارہ تصدیق کر دی ہے اور وسیع تر آزادی کی فضا میں معاشرتی ترقی کو تقویت دینے اور معیارِ زندگی کو بلند کرنے کا ارادہ کر لیا ہے،
__label__ur معاشرے کے رکن کی حیثیت سے ہر شخص کو معاشرتی تحفّظ کا حق حاصل ہے اور یہ حق بھی کہ وہ ملک کے نظام اور وسائل کے مطابق قومی کوشش اور بین الاقوامی تعاون سے ایسے اقتصادی، معاشرتی اور ثقافتی حقوق کو حاصل کرے، جو اس کی عزت اور شخصیت کی آزادانہ نشوونما کے لئے لازم ہیں۔
__label__ur کسی شخص کی نجی زندگی، خانگی زندگی، گھربار، خط و کتابت میں من مانے طریقے پر مداخلت نہ کی جائے گی اور نہ ہی اس کی عزت اور نیک نامی پر حملے کئے جائیں گے۔ ہر شخص کا حق ہے کہ قانون اسے حملے یا مداخلت سے محفوظ رکھے۔
__label__ur اس اعلان کی کسی چیز سے کوئی ایسی بات مراد نہیں لی جا سکتی جس سے کسی ملک، گروہ، یا شخص کو کسی ایسی سرگرمیوں میں مصروف ہونے یا کسی ایسے کام کو سرانجام دینے کا حق پیدا ہو جس کا منشا اُن حقوق اور آزادیوں کی تخریب ہو جو یہاں پیش کی گئی ہیں۔
__label__ur کسی شخص کی نجی زندگی، خانگی زندگی، گھربار، یا خط و کتابت میں من مانے طریقے پر مداخلت نہ کی جائے گی اور نہ ہی اس کی عزت اور نیک نامی پر حملے کیے جائیں گے۔ ہر شخص کو حق حاصل ہے کہ قانون اسے حملے یا مداخلت سے محفوظ رکھے۔
__label__ur چونکہ انسانی حقوق سے لاپروائی اور ان کی بے حرمتی اکثر ایسے وحشیانہ افعال کی شکل میں ظاہر ہوئی ہے جن سے انسانیت کے ضمیر کو سخت صدمے پہنچے ہیں، اور عام انسانوں کی بلند ترین آرزو یہ رہی ہے کہ ایسی دنیا وجود میں آئے جس میں تمام انسانوں کو اپنی بات کہنے اور اپنے عقیدے پر قائم رہنے کی آزادی حاصل ہو اور جہاں وہ خوف اور احتیاج سے محفوظ رہیں،
__label__ur چونکہ اقوامِ متحدہ کی ممبر قوموں نے اپنے چارٹر میں بنیادی انسانی حقوق، انسانی شخصیت کی حرمت اور قدر اور مردوں اور عورتوں کے مساوی حقوق کے بارے میں اپنے عقیدے کی دوبارہ تصدیق کر دی ہے اور وسیع تر آزادی کی فضا میں معاشرتی ترقی کو تقویت دینے اور معیارِ زندگی کو بلند کرنے کا ارادہ کر لیا ہے،
__label__ur تعلیم کا مقصد انسانی شخصیت کی پوری نشوونما ہو گا، اور وہ انسانی حقوق اور بنیادی آزادیوں کے احترام میں اضافہ کرنے کا ذریعہ ہو گی۔ وہ تمام قوموں اور نسلی یا مذہبی گروہوں کے درمیان باہمی مفاہمت، رواداری، اور دوستی کو ترقی دے گی، اور امن کو برقرار رکھنے کے لیے اقوامِ متحدہ کی سرگرمیوں کو آگے بڑھائے گی۔
__label__ur ہر انسان کو آزادیٔ فکر، آزادیٔ ضمیر اور آزادیٔ مذہب کا پورا حق ہے۔ اس حق میں مذہب یا عقیدے کو تبدیل کرنے اور پبلک میں یا نجی طور پر، تنہا یا دوسروں کے ساتھ مِل جل کر عقیدے کی تبلیغ، عمل، عبادت اور مذہبی رسمیں پوری کرنے کی آزادی بھی شامل ہے۔
__label__ur کسی شخص کو کسی ایسے فعل یا فروگذاشت کی بنا پر جو ارتکاب کے وقت قومی یا بین الاقوامی قانون کے اندر تعزیری جرم شمار نہیں کیا جاتا تھا، کسی تعزیری جرم میں ماخوذ نہیں کیا جائے گا۔
__label__ur اپنی آزادیوں اور حقوق سے فائدہ اٹھانے میں ہر شخص صرف ایسی حدود کا پابند ہو گا جو دوسروں کی آزادیوں اور حقوق کو تسلیم کرانے اور ان کا احترام کرانے کی غرض سے یا جمہوری نظام میں اخلاق، امن عامّہ اور عام فلاح و بہبود کے مناسب لوازمات کو پورا کرنے کے لئے قانون کی طرف سے عائد کئے گئے ہیں۔
__label__ur بالغ مردوں اور عورتوں کو بغیر کسی ایسی پابندی کے جو نسل قومیت یا مذہب کی بنا پر لگائی جائے شادی بیاہ کرنے اور گھر بسانے کا حق ہے۔ مردوں اور عورتوں کو نکاح، ازدواجی زندگی اور نکاح کو فسخ کرنے کے معاملہ میں برابر کے حقوق حاصل ہیں۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو ان افعال کے خلاف جو اس دستور یا قانون میں دئے ہوئے بنیادی حقوق کو تلف کرتے ہوں، بااختیار قومی عدالتوں سے موثّر طریقے پر چارہ جوئی کرنے کا پورا حق ہے۔
__label__ur ہر ایک شخص کو یکساں طور پر حق حاصل ہے کہ اس کے حقوق و فرائض کا تعین یا اس کے خلاف کسی عائد کردہ جرم کے بارے میں مقدمے کی سماعت آزاد اور غیر جانبدار عدالت کے کھلے اجلاس میں منصفانہ طریقے سے ہو۔
__label__ur ایسے ہر شخص کو جس پر کوئی فوجداری کا الزام عائد کیا جائے، بے گناہ شمار کیے جانے کا حق حاصل ہے تاوقتیکہ اس پر کھلی عدالت میں قانون کے مطابق جرم ثابت نہ ہو جائے اور اسے اپنی صفائی پیش کرنے کا پورا موقع نہ دیا جا چکا ہو۔
__label__ur ہر شخص جو کام کرتا ہے وہ ایسے مناسب و معقول مشاہرے کا حق رکھتا ہے جو خود اس کے اور اس کے اہل و عیال کے لئے باعزت زندگی کا ضامن ہو۔ اور جس میں اگر ضروری ہو تو معاشرتی تحفّظ کے دوسرے ذریعوں سے اضافہ کیا جا سکے۔
__label__ur بالغ مردوں اور عورتوں کو بغیر کسی ایسی پابندی کے جو نسل، قومیت، یا مذہب کی بنا پر لگائی جائے شادی بیاہ کرنے اور گھر بسانے کا حق حاصل ہے۔ مردوں اور عورتوں کو نکاح، ازدواجی زندگی، اور نکاح فسخ کرنے کے معاملہ میں برابر کے حقوق حاصل ہیں۔
__label__ur کسی شخص کو کسی انجمن میں شامل ہونے کے لیے مجبور نہیں کیا جا سکتا۔
__label__ur ہر انسان کو تنہا یا دوسروں سے مل کر جائداد رکھنے کا حق حاصل ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کا حق ہے کہ اسے ہر ریاست کی حدود کے اندر نقل و حرکت کرنے اور سکونت اختیار کرنے کی آزادی ہو۔
__label__ur کسی شخص کو کسی انجمن میں شامل ہونے لئے مجبور نہیں کیا جا سکتا۔
__label__ur ہر شخص پر معاشرے کے حق ہیں۔ کیونکہ معاشرے میں رہ کر ہی اس کی شخصیت کی آزادانہ اور پوری نشوونما ممکن ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کے اُس معاشرے کی جانب فرائض ہیں جس میں رہ کر ہی اس کی شخصیت کی آزادانہ اور پوری نشوونما ممکن ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو اپنے ملک میں سرکاری ملازمت حاصل کرنے کا برابر کا حق حاصل ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص ایسے معاشرتی اور بین الاقوامی نظام میں شامل ہونے کا حقدار ہے جس میں وہ تمام آزادیاں اور حقوق حاصل ہو سکیں جو اس اعلان میں پیش کر دیے گئے ہیں۔
__label__ur ہر شخص ایسے معاشرتی اور بین الاقوامی نظام میں شامل ہونے کا حقدار ہے جس میں وہ تمام آزادیاں اور حقوق حاصل ہو سکیں جو اس اعلان میں پیش کر دئے گئے ہیں۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو حق حاصل ہے کہ اس کے اُن اخلاقی اور مادّی مفاد کا بچاؤ کیا جائے جو اسے ایسی سائنسی، علمی یا ادبی تصنیف سے، جس کا وہ مصنف ہے، حاصل ہوتے ہیں۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو اپنے مفاد کے بچاؤ کے لئے تجارتی انجمنیں قائم کرنے اور اس میں شریک ہونے کا حق حاصل ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو کسی تفریق کے بغیر مساوی کام کے لئے مساوی معاوضے کا حق ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو ایذا رسانی سے دوسرے ملکوں میں پناہ ڈھونڈنے، اور پناہ مل جائے تو اس سے فائدہ اٹھانے کا حق حاصل ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو کام کاج، روزگار کے آزادانہ انتخاب، کام کاج کی مناسب و معقول شرائط اور بے روزگاری کے خلاف تحفّظ کا حق ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو آرام اور فرصت کا حق حاصل ہے جس میں کام کے گھنٹوں کی مناسب حدبندی اور تنخواہ سمیت میعادی تعطیلات بھی شامل ہیں۔
__label__ur والدین کو اس بات کے انتخاب کا اوّلین حق حاصل ہے کہ ان کے بچوں کو کس قسم کی تعلیم دی جائے گی۔
__label__ur خاندان، معاشرے کی فطری اور بنیادی اکائی ہے، اور وہ معاشرے اور ریاست دونوں کی طرف سے حفاظت کا حقدار ہے۔
__label__ur ہر انسان کو تنہا یا دوسروں سے مل کر جائداد رکھنے کا حق ہے۔
__label__ur کسی شخص کو زبردستی اس کی جائداد سے محروم نہیں کیا جائے گا۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو آرام اور فرصت کا حق ہے جس میں کام کے گھنٹوں کی حدبندی اور تنخواہ کے علاوہ مقرّرہ وقفوں کے ساتھ تعطیلات بھی شامل ہیں۔
__label__ur کوئی شخص محض حاکم کی مرضی پر اپنی قومیت سے محروم نہیں کیا جائے گا اور اس کو قومیت تبدیل کرنے کا حق دینے سے انکار نہ کیا جائے گا۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو حق حاصل ہے کہ ہر مقام پر قانون اس کی شخصیت کو تسلیم کرے۔
__label__ur خاندان، معاشرے کی فطری اور بنیادی اکائی ہے۔ اور وہ معاشرے اور ریاست دونوں کی طرف سے حفاظت کا حقدار ہے۔
__label__ur کسی شخص کو جسمانی اذیّت، یا ظالمانہ، انسانیت سوز، یا ذلیل سلوک یا سزا نہیں دی جائے گی۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو پُر امن طریقے سے ملنے جلنے اور انجمنیں قائم کرنے کی آزادی کا حق حاصل ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو پُرامن طریقے پر مِلنے جُلنے، اور انجمنیں قائم کرنے کی آزادی کا حق ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو اس بات کا حق حاصل ہے کہ وہ کسی بھی ملک سے چلا جائے چاہے وہ ملک اس کا اپنا ہو، اور اسی طرح اسے اپنے ملک میں واپس آجانے کا بھی حق حاصل ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو اس بات کا حق ہے کہ وہ ملک سے چلا جائے چاہے یہ ملک اس کا اپنا ہو۔ اور اسی طرح اسے ملک میں واپس آ جانے کا بھی حق ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو ایذا رسانی سے دوسرے ملکوں میں پناہ ڈھونڈنے، اور پناہ مل جائے تو اس سے فائدہ اٹھانے کا حق ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو اپنے مفادات کے بچاؤ کے لیے تجارتی انجمنیں قائم کرنے اور ان میں شریک ہونے کا حق حاصل ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو کام کاج، روزگار کے آزادانہ انتخاب، کام کاج کی مناسب و معقول شرائط، اور بے روزگاری کے خلاف تحفّظ کا حق حاصل ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو قوم کی ثقافتی زندگی میں آزادانہ حصہ لینے، ادبیات سے مستفید ہونے، اور سائنس کی ترقی اور اس کے فوائد میں شرکت کا حق حاصل ہے۔
__label__ur کوئی شخص غلام یا لونڈی بنا کر نہ رکھا جا سکے گا۔ غلامی اور بَردہ فروشی، چاہے اس کی کوئی شکل بھی ہو، ممنوع قرار دی جائے گی۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو اپنے ملک کی حکومت میں براہِ راست یا آزادانہ طور پر منتخب کئے ہوئے نمائندوں کے ذریعے حصہ لینے کا حق ہے۔
__label__ur یہ حقوق اور آزادیاں کسی حالت میں بھی اقوامِ متحدہ کے مقاصد اور اصول کے خلاف عمل میں نہیں لائی جا سکتیں۔
__label__ur چونکہ یہ ضروری ہے کہ قوموں کے درمیان دوستانہ تعلقات کو بڑھایا جائے،
__label__ur ہر شخص کو اپنے ملک میں سرکاری ملازمت حاصل کرنے کا برابر کا حق ہے۔
__label__ur چونکہ اس عہد کی تکمیل کے لیے بہت ہی اہم ہے کہ ان حقوق اور آزادیوں کی نوعیت کو سب سمجھ سکیں، لہٰذا
__label__ur زچّہ اور بچّہ خاص توجہ اور امداد کے حقدار ہیں۔ تمام بچے خواہ وہ شادی سے پہلے پیدا ہوئے ہوں یا شادی کے بعد معاشرتی تحفّظ سے یکساں طور پر مستفید ہوں گے۔
__label__ur چونکہ اس عہد کی تکمیل کے لیے بہت ہی اہم ہے کہ ان حقوق اور آزادیوں کی نوعیت کو سب سمجھ سکیں،
__label__ur چونکہ ہر انسان کی ذاتی عزت اور حرمت اور انسانوں کے مساوی اور ناقابلِ انتقال حقوق کو تسلیم کرنا دنیا میں آزادی، انصاف اور امن کی بنیاد ہے،
__label__ur نکاح فریقین کی پوری اور آزاد رضامندی سے ہو گا۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو قومیت کا حق ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو اپنی جان، آزادی اور ذاتی تحفّظ کا حق ہے۔
__label__ur ہر شخص کو قومیت کا حق حاصل ہے۔
__label__ur اقوامِ متحدہ کی جنرل اسمبلی
__label__lo ເຈັນນິເຟີຣ໌ ໂລເປສ (ອັງກິດ: Jennifer Lopez) ມີຊື່ເຕັມວ່າ ເຈັນນິເຟີຣ໌ ລິນ ໂລເປສ (ອັງກິດ: Jennifer Lynn Lopez). ເກີດເມື່ອວັນທີ່ 24 ກໍລະກົດ 1969. ເປັນນັກຮ້ອງ ນັກສະແດງຊາວອາເມລິກັນ. ເປັນເຈົ້າຂອງເພງປາກົດຊື່ລືຊາຢ່າງ "If You Had My Love", "Jenny From The Block" ແລະ "I'm Real" ເປັນຕົ້ນ ເຊິ່ງຜົນງານອະລະບ້ຳອັນກາຍມາເຮັດຍອດຂາຍໄດ້ຫຼາຍກວ່າ 35 ລ້ານຊຸດທົ່ວໂລກ. ນັກຮ້ອງອາເມລິກັນ ນັກສະແດງອາເມລິກັນ ບຸກຄົນທີ່ເກີດໃນປີ ພ.ສ. 2512 ບຸກຄົນທີ່ຍັງມີຊີວິດຢູ່ ນັກຮ້ອງສຽງເມສໂຊ-ໂຊປຣາໂນ ຜູ້ອຳນວຍການສ້າງລາຍການໂທລະພາບຊາວອາເມລິກັນ ຊາວອາເມລິກັນເຊື້ອສາຍຮິສປານິກ ບຸກຄົນຈາກເດີບຣັອງ ນັກສະແດງຍິງຊາວອາເມລິກັນໃນສະຕະວັດທີ 20 ນັກສະແດງຍິງຊາວອາເມລິກັນໃນສະຕະວັດທີ 21
__label__lo ງານບຸນພະທາດເມືອງສິງ: (ງານບຸນປະຈຳປີ) ເຊິ່ງຈະຈັດຂຶ້ນ ໃນທ້າຍເດືອນຕຸລາ ຫລື ຕົ້ນເດືອນພະຈິກ ຕາມກຳນົດວັນໃນປະຕິທິນຂອງ ແຕ່ລະປີ ສະຖານທີ່ຈັດງານແມ່ນບໍລິເວນເທິງພູທາງທິດໃຕ້ ຂອງຕົວເມືອງຈັດເປັນງານບຸນໃນພະພຸດທະສາສະຫນາ ຈິ່ງມີທັງທູບທຽນ, ອາຫານທີ່ຊາວບ້ານ ນຳມາຖວາຍພະສົງ. ເຜົ່າຕ່າງໆ ກໍ່ມາຮ່ວມງານບຸນນີ້ ເຊັ່ນກັນ ມີການແຕ່ງກາຍປະຈຳເຜົ່າ ສ່ວນບຸນສົງການໃນເດືອນເມສາ ແລະ ບຸນບັ້ງໄຟເພື່ອຂໍຝົນ ໃນຊ້ວງລະດູແລ້ງກໍຄຶກຄື້ນບໍ່ຫນ້ອຍ.
__label__lo ສົມບັດ ເມທະນີ (, 26 ມິຖຸນາ 1937 – 18 ສິງຫາ 2022) ແມ່ນນັກສະແດງແລະຜູ້ກຳກັບຮູບເງົາຊາວໄທ ເຊິ່ງໄດ້ຮັບກຽດໃນຖານະສິລະປິນແຫ່ງຊາດໃນສາຂາສິນລະປະການສະແດງໃນປີ 2016 ຄັ້ງໜຶ່ງ ລາວຖືບັນທຶກສະຖິຕິໂລກກິນເນສສຳລັບການປາກົດຕົວໃນຮູບເງົາສ່ວນໃຫຍ່ (ມາກກວ່າ 600 ເລື່ອງ) ໂດຍການນັບຂອງລາວເອງ ລາວສ້າງຮູບເງົາແລະລາຍການໂທລະພາບມາກກວ່າ 2,000 ລາຍການ ລວມເຖິງລະຄອນໂທລະພາບ ນັກສະແດງນຳທີ່ອຸດົມສົມບູນໃນຮູບເງົາແອັກຊັ່ນ ໂລແມນຕິກ ດຣາມ່າ ຕະລົກ ແລະລະຄອນເພງທີ່ຈຸດສູງສຸດໃນອາຊີບຂອງລາວໃນປີ 1960 ແລະປີ 1970 ລາວຍັງຄົງສະແດງໃນຮູບເງົາແລະລະຄອນໂທລະພາບໄທຕໍ່ໄປ ອອກລາຍການທອກໂຊບ່ອຍໆແລະຖ່າຍທຳໂຄສະນາ ໃນບັນດາຮູບເງົາເລື່ອງຕໍ່ມາຂອງລາວຄຶ ຟ້າທະລາຍໂຈນ ແລະ ສຸລິໂຍໄທ ນັກສະແດງໄທ ຜູ້ກຳກັບຮູບເງົາໄທ
__label__lo ກອນເສກ ໂຄນິນ ເກິດ 3 ມັງກອນ 1985 ເປນນັກສະແດງຊາວໄທ ผลงาน ละครโทรทัศน์ ละครโทรทัศน์ทั้งหมดด้านล่างนี้ออกอากาศทางสถานีวิทยุโทรทัศน์ไทยทีวีสีช่อง 3 ละครโทรทัศน์ทั้งหมดด้านล่างนี้ออกอากาศทางPPTV ละครโทรทัศน์ทั้งหมดด้านล่างนี้ออกอากาศทางสถานีโทรทัศน์สีกองทัพบกช่อง 7 ละครสั้น 2556 ฟ้ามีตา ตอน วันที่ไม่รักกัน รับบท พลุ 2557 ยมบาลเจ้าขา ตอน ความรักของพ่อ รับบท ธนา 2557 รักเต็มบ้าน รับบท เอก (รับเชิญ) ตอน ร้อยตำรวจเอก 2561 ฟ้ามีตา ตอน หลุมหลบภัย รับบท แป๊ะ (บทร้าย) ນັກສະແດງ ນັກສະແດງໄທ ບຸກຄົນຈາກຈັງຫວັດຊົນບຸລີ
__label__lo ໂຣບອດທສ໌ (โรบอทส์) () ເປັນຮູບເງົາຕະຫຼົກການຜະຈົນໄພແບບນິຍາຍວິທະຍາສາດຄອມພິວເຕີ-ອະນິເມຊັນຂອງອາເມຣິກາໃນປີ 2005 ທີ່ຜະລິດໂດຍ Blue Sky Studios ແລະຈັດຈຳໜ່າຍໂດຍ 20th Century Fox. ອ້າງອີງ ລິ້ງຄ໌ພາຍນອກ ຮູບເງົາ
__label__lo ມິສທົວລິຊຶມຄວີນອິນເຕີເນຊັນແນວ () ເປັນການປະກວດທູດວັດທະນະທຳການທ່ອງທ່ຽວ ຈັດການປະກວດຄັ້ງທຳອິດໃນປີ ຄ.ສ. 2004. ມີຈຸດປະສົງຫຼັກໃນການຊອກຫາສາວງາມທີ່ມີຄວາມພ້ອມທາງດ້ານຕ່າງໆມາເປັນທູດວັດທະນະທຳລະຫວ່າງປະເທດເພື່ອການພັດທະນາການທ່ອງທ່ຽວແລະມິດຕະພາບລະຫວ່າງປະເທດ. ເວທີໃນເຄືອ ມິສທົວລິຊຶມຄວີນອາຊີ ຜູ້ທີ່ໄດ້ຮັບຕຳແໜ່ງລ່າສຸດ (ເວີຊັນ ຈີນ) ຮອງຊະນະເລີດ ຄອນຕິເນນທອລຄວີນ ຕົວແທນປະເທດລາວ ປີ 2018 ໄດ້ຮັບການແຕ່ງຕັ້ງໄປປະກວດ ເພີ່ມເຕີມ ລາຍະການປະກວດຄວາມງາມ ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ແມ່ແບບການປະກວດນາງງາມ ການປະກວດນາງງາມ
__label__lo ພົນເອກອາວຸໂສ ຕານ ສ່ວຍ (ພະມ່າ: သန္‌​းေရ္ဝ္ဟ; ; ເກີດ 2 ກຸມພາ ຄ.ສ. 1933) ຜູ້ນຳຜະເດັດການຂອງຣັດຖະບານທະຫານພະມ່າ ດຳລົງຕຳແໜ່ງປະທານສະພາສັນຕິພາບ ແລະການພັດທະນາແຫ່ງລັດ(State Peace and Development Council - SPDC) ​ພາຍຫຼັງການລັດຖະປະຫານລົ້ມອຳນາດຂອງພົນເອກອາວຸໂສ ຊອ ໝ່ອງ ອະດີດປະທານສະພາຟື້ນຟູກົດໝາຍແລະລະບຽບແຫ່ງລັດ (State Law and Order Restoration Council - SLORC) ເມື່ອວັນທີ່ 23 ເມສາ ຄ.ສ. 1992 ຊາວພະມ້າ
__label__lo ນາງງາມສຸໂຂໄທ 2019 (ໄທ: นางงามสุโขทัย2019, มิสสุโขทัย 2019) (ອັງກິດ: Miss Sukhothai 2019, Nang Ngam Sukhothai 2019) ເປັນການຈັດການປະກວດນາງງາມສຸໂຂໄທ ຄັ້ງທຳອິດ ເພື່ອເປັນຕົວແທນຈັງຫວັດສຸໂຂໄທ ເຈົ້າຮ່ວມປະກາດນາງສາວໄທປະຈໍາພາບເໜືອ ເພື່ອເລືອກເຈົ້າຮ່ວມປະກາດນາງສາວໄທ 2019 ຜົນການປະກວດ ລາງວັນພິເສດ ໝາຍເຫດ: ນາງງາມຜິວງາມແລະສຸ​ຂະ​ພາບ​ດີ: ໝາຍເລກ 5 - ธิดารัตน์ อ่อนเส็ง (ຕັດສິດລາງວັນໝາຍເລກ 9 - แคทลียา เดลแมร์ ເນື່ອງ​ຈາກບໍ່ຢູ່ຮັບລາງວັນນາງງາມຜິວງາມແລະສຸ​ຂະ​ພາບ​ດີເລີຍຕ້ອງຕັດສິນໃຫມ່ໃຫ້ໝາຍເລກ 5 - ธิดารัตน์ อ่อนเส็ง) ຜູ້ເຂົ້າປະກວດ ອ້າງອີງ ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ມິສໄທແລນ ແມ່ແບບການປະກວດນາງງາມ ການປະກວດແບ່ງຕາມຈັງຫວັດ ການປະກວດນາງງາມ ການປະກວດນາງງາມໃນປະເທດໄທ
__label__lo ພຶດຊະຄະນິດພື້ນຖານ (ຄຳເຄົ້າ: ພຶຊຄນິຕພື້ນຖານ) ແມ່ນ ພຶດຊະຄະນິດຂັ້ນຕົ້ນ ທີ່ຖືກສອນໃຫ້ ນັກຮຽນໃນ ລະດັບມັດທະຍົມ, ອຸດົມ. ໃນຂະນະທີ່ ການຄຳນວນ ຈະມີແຕ່ ຕົວເລກ ແລະ ເຄື່ອງໝາຍຄິດໄລ່ (ເຊັ່ນ +, −, ×, ÷) , ໃນຄະນິດສາດ ຈະມີການນຳໃຊ້ ເຄື່ອງໝາຍ (ເຊັ່ນ x ແລະ y, ຫຼື a ແລະ b) ເພື່ອສະແດງເຖິງ ໂຕເລກ. ສິ່ງເຫຼົ່ານີ້ ຖືກເອີ້ນວ່າ ໂຕປ່ຽນ. ສິ່ງນີ້ ມີຜົນດີຢູ່ບ່ອນວ່າ: ເຮັດໃຫ້ສາມາດ ສະແດງ ຫຼັກເກນ (ເຊັ່ນ ສຳຫຼັບ ທຸກໆ a ແລະ b)ສົມຜົນ (ແລະ ອະສົມຜົນ) ແບບທົ່ວໄປ, ເຊິ່ງແມ່ນ ຈຸດເລີ່ມຕົ້ນ ຂອງ ການສຶກສາຄຸນລັກສະນະ ຂອງ ຈຳນວນຈິງ. ເຮັດໃຫ້ສາມາດ ອ້າງອີງເຖິງ ຈຳນວນ ທີ່ ຍັງບໍ່ຮູ້ (ໂຕລັບ). ເຮັດໃຫ້ສາມາດ ສຶກສາ ຄວາມສຳພັນ ຂອງ ປະລິມານ (ເຊັ່ນ "ຖ້າທ່ານຂາຍ x ປີ້, ຜົນກຳໄລ ທີ່ ທ່ານຈະໄດ້ຮັບ ຈະແມ່ນ ກີບ"). ຫຼັກເກນຄວາມທຽບເທົ່າ ຖ້າ ແລະ , ສະນັ້ນ ຖ້າ ສະນັ້ນ ຫຼັກເກນອື່ນໆ ຖ້າ ແລະ ສະນັ້ນ ຖ້າ ສະນັ້ນ ສຳຫຼັບທຸກໆ c ຖ້າ ແລະ ສະນັ້ນ = ຖ້າ ສະນັ້ນ ສຳຫຼັບທຸກໆ c ຖ້າ ແລະ ສະນັ້ນ ຖ້າ ສະນັ້ນ ສຳຫຼັບທຸກໆ c ຖ້າ ແລະ ສະນັ້ນ ຖ້າ ແລະ ສະນັ້ນ ຕົວຢ່າງ ສົມຜົນເສັ້ນຊື່ໜຶ່ງໂຕປ່ຽນ ໃນກໍລະນີທົ່ວໄປ, ຮູບຮ່າງຄຳຕອບ ແມ່ນ: ສົມຜົນຂັ້ນສອງ ax2 + bx + c = 0, ໃນນີ້ a ຕ່າງສູນ ໃນນີ້ p = b/a ແລະ q = −c/a. ຄະນິດສາດ ພຶດຊະຄະນິດ
__label__lo ເບຍ (ຄຳເຄົ້າ: ເບຍຣ໌) ແມ່ນນ້ຳດື່ມອັນເຮັດໃຫ້ມົວເມົາຫຼາຍຮູບແບບທີ່ກາຍການສ່າຜະລິຕະພັນພວກທັນຍາຫານ. ປະຫວັດຄວາມເປັນມາຂອງເບຍ ແມ່ນມີມາດົນນານ. ເບຍເປັນເຄື່ອງດື່ມນ້ຳເຫຼົ້າຊະນິດທຳອິດຂອງໂລກ. ລິເລີ່ມຜະລິດ 6,000 ປີກ່ອນຄິດຕະການ ໂດຍຊົນຊາດບາບິໂລເນຍ. ເບຍເປັນທີ່ຮູ້ຈັກ​ໃນສະໄໝເອຢິບບູຮານແລະເມໂຊໂປເຕເມຍ ແລະມີຫຼັກຖານກັບຄືນໄປດົນນານເຖິງ 4,000 ປີກ່ອນຄິດຕະການ ໂດຍໃຊ້ເຂົ້າບາເລ ເປັນວັດຖຸດິບ. ໃນປະມານ 1,000 ປີກ່ອນຄິດຕະການ ແມ່ນມີການປະສົມປະສານພືດຜັກອີກໜຶ່ງຊະນິດເຂົ້າໄປແມ່ນ ຮັອບ (hops) ເຮັດໃຫ້ມີກິ່ນຫອມຮຶນ ລົດຊາດຂົມ ແລະ ສາມາດປົກປັກຮັກສາຄຸນະພາບຂອງເບຍໃຫ້ເກັບໄດ້ດົນນານຂຶ້ນ. ແຕ່ຢ່າງໃດກໍດີ ພວກເບຍແບບນີ້ແມ່ນແຕກຕ່າງຈາກເບຍໃນປະຈຸບັນ ແລະເນື່ອງຈາກເຄື່ອງປຸງແລະວິທີການເຮັດເບຍອັນແຕກຕ່າງກັນໄປຕາມແຕ່ບ່ອນ ລັກສະນະໜ້າຕາຂອງເບຍ ເຊັ່ນ ລົດຊາດ ແລະ ສີສັນ ຈັ່ງມີຄວາມແຕກຕ່າງກັນໄດ້ຫຼາຍຫຼວງ. ອ້າງອີງ ເຄື່ອງດື່ມ ເຄື່ອງດື່ມມົວເມົາ ເບຍ
__label__lo ມິສຊຸປຣາເນຊັນແນລ ເລີ່ມຈັດການປະກວດຄັ້ງທຳອິດໃນປີ ຄ.ສ. 2009. ປັດຈຸບັນມີຜູ້ໄດ້ຮັບຕຳແໜ່ງ ມິສຊຸປຣາເນຊັນແນລ ທັງໝົດ 9ຄົນ. ລາຍຊື່ຜູ້ທີ່ໄດ້ຮັບຕຳແໜ່ງ ຈຳນວນປະເທດທີ່ຊະນະ ລຳດັບສັນຊາດຂອງຜູ້ຊະນະ ເພີ່ມເຕີມ ມິສຊຸປຣາເນຊັນແນລ ອ້າງອີງ ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ມິສຊຸປຣາເນຊັນແນລ ການປະກວດນາງງາມ ໂກລໂບ້ວ ບິວຕີ້
__label__lo ຄວາມເປັນພົນລະເມືອງ () ແມ່ນສະຖານະພາບຂອງບຸກຄົນທີ່ຈາລີດປະເພນີ ຫຼື ກົດໝາຍຂອງລັດ ຮັບຮອງ ໂດຍໃຫ້ສິດທິ ແລະ ໜ້າທີ່ ຂອງຄວາມເປັນພົນລະເມືອງໃຫ້ກັບບຸກຄົນ, ເຊິ່ງອາດຮວມມີ ສິດທິໃນການອອກສຽງເລືອກຕັ້ງ, ການເຮັດວຽກແລະອາໄສຢູ່ໃນປະເທດ, ສິດທິກັບປະເທດ, ສິດທິຄອບຄອງອະສັງຫາລິມະຊັບ, ການຄຸ້ມຄອງທາງກົດໝາຍຕໍ່ລັດຖະບານຂອງປະເທດ, ແລະການຄຸ້ມຄອງຜ່ານກອງທັບຫຼືການທູດ. ພົນລະເມືອງຍັງມີໜ້າທີ່ບາງຢ່າງ ເຊັ່ນ ການປະຕິບັດຕາມກົດໝາຍຂອງລັດ, ຈ່າຍພາສີ, ຫຼື ຮັບລາຊະການທະຫານ. ບຸກຄົນອາດມີຄວາມເປັນພົນລະເມືອງຫຼາຍ ແລະບຸກຄົນທີ່ບໍ່ມີຄວາມເປັນພົນລະເມືອງ ຖືກເອີ້ນວ່າ ຜູ້ໄຮ້ສັນຊາດ (stateless). ອ້າງອີງ
__label__lo ນະໂຍບາຍເງິນຕາແມ່ນ ການທີ່ ລັດຖະບານ, ທະນະຄານກາງ ຫຼື ອົງກອນກ່ຽວຂ້ອງອື່ນໆ ທຳການ ດັດປັບ ປະລິມານເງິນ ເພື່ອບັນລຸ ເປົ້າໝາຍໃດໜຶ່ງ— ເຊັ່ນ ຄວບຄຸມ ອັດຕາເງິນເຟີ້, ເຮັດໃຫ້ ອັດຕາແລກປ່ຽນ ມີສະຖຽນລະພາບ, ບັນລຸ ການຈ້າງງານສົມບູນ ຫຼື ການຂະຫຍາຍໂຕທາງດ້ານເສດຖະກິດ. (ໂດຍທົ່ວໄປ ເປົ້າໝາຍ ຂອງ ນະໂຍບາຍເງິນຕາ ແມ່ນ ເພື່ອ ເຮັດໃຫ້ມີການຂະຫຍາຍໂຕທາງດ້ານເສດຖະກິດ ພາຍໃຕ້ ສະພາວະລາຄາ ທີ່ມີສະຖຽນລະພາບ.) ນະໂຍບາຍເງິນຕາ ສາມາດ ປະກອບມີ ທັງ ການດັດປັບ ອັດຕາດອກເບ້ຍ ໃດໜຶ່ງ ໂດຍທາງກົງ ຫຼື ທາງອ້ອມ, ກຳນົດ ອັດຕາ ບັນດາ ການສະສົມບັງຄັບ, ເປັນຜູ້ໃຫ້ກູ້ ລວມທັງ ການຊື້ຂາຍເງິນຕາຕ່າງປະເທດ ໃນ ຕະຫຼາດເງິນຕາຕ່າງປະເທດອີກ. ນະໂຍບາຍເງິນຕາ ໂດຍທົ່ວໄປ ຈະມີຢູ່ 2 ແບບ ຄື ນະໂຍບາຍເງິນຕາຂະຫຍາຍ, ແລະ ນະໂຍບາຍເງິນຕາຮັດກຸມ. ໃນນີ້ ນະໂຍບາຍເງິນຕາຂະຫຍາຍ ແມ່ນ ການເພີ່ມປະລິມານເງິນ ໃນຕະຫຼາດ ແລະ ນະໂຍບາຍເງິນຕາຮັດກຸມ ແມ່ນ ການຫຼຸດປະລິມານເງິນໃນຕະຫຼາດ. ໃນໄລຍະຜ່ານມາ, ນະໂຍບາຍເງິນຕາຂະຫຍາຍ ແມ່ນຖືກໃຊ້ເພື່ອແກ້ໄຂບັນຫາ ການຫວ່າງງານ ໃນໄລຍະ ເສດຖະກິດຕົກຕໍ່າ ໂດຍການຫຼຸດ ອັດຕາດອກເບ້ຍ, ແລະ ນະໂຍບາຍເງິນຕາຮັດກຸມ ແມ່ນ ຖືກໃຊ້ ເພື່ອ ຍົກ ອັດຕາດອກເບ້ຍ ເພື່ອແກ້ໄຂບັນຫາ ສະພາວະເງິນເຟີ້ (ຫຼື ເຮັດໃຫ້ ສະພາວະຟົດເດືອດຂອງເສດຖະກິດເຢັນລົງ). ເບິ່ງຕື່ມ ນະໂຍບາຍການເງິນ ນ ນ
__label__lo ໂນບິ ໂນບິຕະ（ຍີ່ປຸ່ນ:Nobi Nobita）ນາງ ເກີດໃນວັນທີ 7 ສິງຫາ, ແມ່ນຕົວລະຄອນຫຼັກຂອງການເຄື່ອນໄຫວຂອງກາຕູນແລະກາຕູນກາຕູນ ໂດລາເອມອນ, ອາໄສຢູ່ໃນໂຕກຽວ. ແຕ່ເມື່ອເວລາປ່ຽນແປງ, ລາວເປັນນັກຮຽນປະຖົມໃນໂຕກຽວແລະໄດ້ອາໄສຢູ່ ນຳ ພໍ່ແມ່ເປັນເວລາສິບປີ. ລາວໃສ່ແວ່ນຕາ, ເສື້ອໂປໂລສີແດງຫລືສີເຫລືອງທີ່ມີຄໍຂາວ, ແລະສັ້ນສີຟ້າຫລືສີ ດຳ. ໂນບິຕະ ປົກກະຕິແລ້ວແມ່ນໂງ່ຈ້າ, ບໍ່ເປັນມືອາຊີບ, ຂີ້ຄ້ານ, ມືດມົວ, ອ່ອນແອ, ອ່ອນແອ, ເດັກນ້ອຍແລະບໍ່ດີໃນກິລາ. ລາວບໍ່ມັກປື້ມແລະມີຄວາມຮູ້ພື້ນຖານທາງວິທະຍາສາດ, ບໍ່ສາມາດເຂົ້າໃຈແນວຄວາມຄິດ. ລາວມັກຈະມີໂອກາດທີ່ຈະໄດ້ນອນແລະມັກເຄື່ອງມືທີ່ເຮັດໃຫ້ລາວມີເວລາພິເສດຫລືເຮັດວຽກໃຫ້ລາວ, ແລະດັ່ງນັ້ນຈຶ່ງຮູ້ກັນວ່າມັນຂີ້ຄ້ານ.
__label__lo ຄວາມຮັບຜິດຊອບໃນການປົກປ້ອງ ( R2P ຫຼື RtoP ) ແມ່ນ ຄຳ ໝັ້ນ ສັນຍາທາງການເມືອງທົ່ວໂລກເຊິ່ງໄດ້ຮັບການຮັບຮອງຈາກທຸກໆປະເທດສະມາຊິກຂອງ ສະຫະປະຊາຊາດ ໃນ ກອງປະຊຸມສຸດຍອດໂລກປີ 2005 ເພື່ອແກ້ໄຂບັນຫາ 4 ຂໍ້ທີ່ ສຳຄັນຂອງມັນໃນການປ້ອງກັນ ການຂ້າລ້າງເຜົ່າພັນ , ອາຊະຍາກຳ ສົງຄາມ, ການ ກຳຈັດຊົນເຜົ່າ ແລະ ອາຊະຍາ ກຳຕໍ່ກັບມະນຸດ .
__label__lo ນ້ຳທາຍາວ 325 ກິໂລແມັດ, ເກີດຈາກສາຍພູບໍ່ເຕ່ນ ( ຊາຍແດນລາວ-ຈີນ ). ໄຫຼຜ່ານແຂວງຫຼວງນ້ຳທາ ແລ້ວປ່ອງໃສ່ນ້ຳຂອງຢູ່ເມືອງປາກທາ ແຂວງບໍ່ແກ້ວ.ເປັນແມ່ນ້ຳທີ່ສຳຄັນໃນການປະກອບສ້າງທົ່ງພຽງຫລວງນ້ຳທາ ແລະ ຍັງມີຄວາມສາມາດຂະຫຍາຍໄຟຟ້ານ້ຳຕົກອີກດ້ວຍ.
__label__lo Chadchart Sittipunt ( Thai ชัชชาติ , RTGS : Chatchat Sitthiphan, pronounced [t͡ɕʰát.t͡ɕʰâːt sìt.tʰí(ʔ).pʰān] ; ເກີດເມື່ອວັນທີ 24 ພຶດສະພາ 1966) ເປັນນັກການເມືອງ, ວິສະວະກອນ, ສາດສະດາຈານ, ເປັນຜູ້ວ່າລາຊະການ ບາງກອກ ກ່ອນ​ໜ້າ​ນີ້ ທ່ານ​ເຄີຍ​ເປັນ ​ລັດຖະມົນຕີ​ກະຊວງ​ຄົມມະນາຄົມ​ຂົນ​ສົ່ງ ​ແຕ່​ປີ 2012 ຫາ 2014. ​ໃນ​ປີ 2019, ທ່ານ​ໄດ້​ປະກາດ​ຄວາມ​ຕັ້ງ​ໃຈ​ລົງ​ແຂ່ງຂັນ​ໃນ​ການ​ເລືອກ​ຕັ້ງ​ຜູ້ວ່າ ຫຼື ເຈົ້າແຂວງ ​ບາງກອກ​ປີ 2022 ​ໃນ​ຖານະ​ເປັນ​ຜູ້​ລົງສະໝັກ​ຮັບ​ເລືອກ​ຕັ້ງ​ອິດສະຫຼະ. ບຸກຄົນຈາກບາງກອກ ບຸກຄົນທີ່ຍັງມີຊີວິດຢູ່ ບຸກຄົນທີ່ເກີດໃນປີ ຄ.ສ. 1966
__label__lo ການແຂ່ງຂັນເຕະບານ ຄອນເມບອລ–ຍູຟາ ຄັບ ອອຟ ແຊມປ້ຽນ ຫຼື ຟີນາລິຊີມາ Finalissima ກ່ອນໜ້ານີ້ຮູ້ຈັກຢ່າງເປັນທາງການເປັນ ການແຂ່ງຂັນຊິງຖ້ວຍລະຫວ່າງແຊ້ມຂອງເອີຣົບ/ອາເມລິກາໃຕ້ ແລະ ທົ່ວໄປຮູ້ຈັກຄື Artemio Franchi Cup, ແມ່ນການແຂ່ງຂັນ ບານເຕະ ຊຸບເປີຄັບ ຢ່າງເປັນທາງການທີ່ຈັດໂດຍ CONMEBOL ແລະ UEF ເຊິ່ງແມ່ນການານເຂົ້າຊິງລະຫວ່າງທີມຜູ້ຊະນະຂອງ Copa América ແລະ ທີມທີ່ຊະນະ ຍູໂຣຄັບຂອງສະຫະພັນບານເຕະເອີຣົບ. ຈັດເປັນການແຂ່ງຂັນສີ່ ປີມີຄັ້ງດຽວ ແລະນັດດຽວ ມັນທຽບເທົ່າກັບ ການແຂ່ງຂັນເຕະບານ Intercontinental Cup ທີ່ມີສະໂມສອນແຊ້ມເອີຣົບ ແລະ ອາເມລິກາໃຕ້ເຂົ້າຊິງແຊ້ມກັນ. ການແຂ່ງຂັນໄດ້ຈັດຂຶ້ນສອງຄັ້ງມາແລ້ວ ໃນ ປີ 1985 ແລະ 1993, ກ່ອນທີ່ຈະຢຸດເຊົາ. ມັນໄດ້ຖືກເລີ່ມຄືນໃຫມ່ປີ 2022 ແລະ ຕັ້ງຊື່ວ່າ Finalissima (ຄວາມໝາຍພາສາອີຕາລີວ່າ ຮອບສຸດທ້າຍທີ່ຍິ່ງໃຫ່ຍ) ຫລັງຈາກການລົງນາມໃນ ບົດບັນທຶກຄວາມເຂົ້າໃຈ ລະຫວ່າງ CONMEBOL ແລະ UEFA. ອ້າງອິງ
__label__lo ທະລານຊິສະເຕີ () ແມ່ນອຸປະກອນສານກຶ່ງໂຕນຳທີ່ ສາມາດເຮັດໜ້າທີ່ ຂະຫຍາຍສັນຍານໄຟຟ້າ ເປິດ/ປິດສັນຍານໄຟຟ້າ ຄົງຄ່າແຮງດັນໄຟຟ້າ ຫຼືກ້ຳສັນຍານໄຟຟ້າ (modulate) ເປັນຕົ້ນ. ການເຮັດວຽກຂອງທະລານຊິສະເຕີ ປຽບໄດ້ກັບວາວ ທີ່ຖືກຄວບຄຸມດ້ວຍສັນຍານໄຟຟ້າຂາເຂົ້າ ເພື່ອປັບຂະໜາດກະແສໄຟຟ້າຂາອອກ ທີ່ມາຈາກແຫຼ່ງຈ່າຍແຮງດັນ. ເອເລັກໂຕຣນິກ
__label__lo ເຄື່ອງລາຊະອິດສະລິຍາພອນອັນເປົນທີ່ສັນເສິນຍິ່ງດິເລກຄຸນາພອນ ແມ່ນເຄື່ອງລາຊະອິດສະລິຍາພອນໄທ ມີ 7 ລະດັບ ປະຫວັດ ເຄື່ອງລາຊະອິດສະລິຍາພອນອັນເປັນທີ່ສັນເສິນຍິ່ງດິເລກຄຸນາພອນ ພະບາດສົມເດັດພະປໍຣະມິນມະຫາພູມິພົນອະດຸນຍະເດດ ຊົງໂປດເກລົ້າ ໃຫ້ສ້າງຂຶ້ນໃນ ຄ.ສ. 1991 ສຳຫຼັບພະລາດຊະທານໃຫ້ແກ່ຜູ້ເຮັດປະໂຍດແກ່ສັງຄົມ ້ຜູ້ສ້າງຊື່ສຽງດ້ານວິຊາການ ແລະຜູ້ບໍລິຈາກເງິນໃຫ້ແກ່ສະພາກາແດງໄທ ລະດັບຊັ້ນ ປະຖົມດິເລກຄຸນາພອນ ທຸດຕິຍະດິເລກຄຸນາພອນ ຕະຕິຍະດິເລກຄຸນາພອນ ຈະຕຸດຕະຖະດິເລກຄຸນາພອນ ເບນຈະມະດິເລກຄຸນາພອນ ຫຼຽນທອງດິເລກຄຸນາພອນ ຫຼຽນເງິນດິເລກຄຸນາພອນ ອ້າງອິງ ເຄື່ອງລາຊະອິດສະລິຍາພອນໄທ
__label__lo ພາສາກລິງກອງ (; ກລິງກອງ: tlhIngan Hol, ອອກສຽງ ) ແມ່ນພາສາປະດິດເຊິ່ງຖືກເວົ້າໂດຍພວກກລິງກອງ ຢູ່ໃນຮູບເງົາ ສະຕາ ເທຣັກ (Star Trek). ພາສານີ້ແມ່ນຖືກປະດິດຂຶ້ນໂດຍມາຣ໌ກ ໂອແຄຣນ ນັກພາສາສາດຊາວອາເມລິກັນ. ກ່ອນທີ່ຈະມີການປະດິດພາສາກລິງກອງຂຶ້ນມາ, ພວກກລິງກອງໃນຮູບເງົາເລື່ອງ ສະຕາ ເທຣັກ ຈະສື່ສານພົວພັນກັນໂດຍໃຊ້ພາສາອັງກິດ. ແຕ່ເມື່ອພາສາກລິງກອງໄດ້ຖືກປະດິດຂຶ້ນມາແລ້ວ, ພວກກລິງກອງກໍປ່ຽນໄປສື່ສານພົວພັນກັນໂດຍໃຊ້ພາສາກລິງກອງແທນ. ຜູ້ຄົນທີ່ສາມາດໃຊ້ພາສາກລິງກອງໄດ້ເປັນຢ່າງດີແມ່ນມີນ້ອຍຫຼາຍ. ເພາະວ່າຄຳສັບໃນພາສານີ້ມີສູນກາງມາຈາກແນວຄິດທາງດ້ານຍານອາວະກາດແລະສົງຄາມເປັນສ່ວນໃຫຍ່, ແລະຍາກທີ່ຈະເອົາພາສານີ້ໄປໃຊ້ໃນຊີວິດປະຈຳວັນຂອງຜູ້ຄົນໄດ້.
__label__lo ພາສາອິຕາລີ ຫຼື ພາສາອິຕາລຽນ ( ຫຼື lingua italiana; ) ເປັນພາສາໃນກຸ່ມພາສາໂລມັງ,ໂດຍສ່ວນໃຫນ່ພາສາເປັນພາສາທີ່ໃກ້ຄຽງກັບພາສາລາຕິນຫຼາຍທີ່ສຸດໃນກຸ່ມພາສາໂລມັງດ້ວຍກັນ, ພາສາອິຕາລີເປັນພາສາທາງການອີຕາລີ, ສະວິດເຊີແລນ, ຊັງມາລີໂນ, ນະຄອນວາຕິກັນ ແລະ ອິສເຕຣຍຕາເວັນຕົກ (ໃນສະໂລເວນີ ແລະ ກຣົວຊີ), ເຄີຍມີສະຖານະເປັນພາສາທາງການຂອງແອລບາເນຍ, ມອນຕາ ແລະ ໂມນາໂກ ເຊິ່ງມີການເວົ້າພາສານີ້ຢ່າງກວ້າງຂວາງລວມທັງອະດີດອານານິຄົມອາຟຣິກາຕາເວັນອອກຂອງອິຕາລີ ແລະ ອາຟຣິກາເໜືອຂອງອິຕາລີ ມີການເວົ້າພາສາອິຕາລີໃນກຸ່ມຜູ້ອົບພະຍົບຊາວອິຕາລີຂະໜາດໃຫຍ່ໃນອາເມລິກາ ແລະ ອົດສະຕຣາລີ, ມີສະຖານະເປັນພາສາທາງການຂອງ​ຊົນ​ເຜົ່າ​ສ່ວນ​ໜ້ອຍ​ໃນບົດສະນີ ແລະ ແຮກເຊໂກວິນາ, ສະໂລເວນີ, ກຣົວຊີ ແລະ ຣູມານີ ອ້າງອີງ M. Vitale, Studi di Storia della Lingua Italiana, LED Edizioni Universitarie, Milano, 1992, ISBN 88-7916-015-X S. Morgana, Capitoli di Storia Linguistica Italiana, LED Edizioni Universitarie, Milano, 2003, ISBN 88-7916-211-X J. Kinder, CLIC: Cultura e Lingua d'Italia in CD-ROM / Culture and Language of Italy on CD-ROM, Interlinea, Novara, 2008, ISBN 978-88-8212-637-7 ລິງຄ໌ພາຍນອກ Italian Antonyms and Synonyms Learn Italian - Molto Bene Italian Synonyms ອິຕາລີ ອິຕາລີ
__label__lo Laos Pictures ຮູບພາບປະເທດລາວ ເປັນເຄືອຂ່າຍສັງຄົມອອນລາຍທີ່ສ້າງຂື້ນເພື່ອນຳສະເໜີສິ່ງຕ່າງໆກ່ຽວກັບປະເທດລາວ ທາງດ້ານວັດທະນະທຳ, ສັງຄົມ, ຮີດຄອງປະເພນີ, ທຳມະຊາດ, ສະຖານທີ່, ເຫດການ, ແລະ ບຸກຄົນ ທີ່ກ່ຽວຂ້ອງກັບປະເທດລາວຕັ້ງແຕ່ອະດີດຈົນເຖິງປັດຈຸບັນ ໂດຍຜ່ານຮູບພາບ, ຮູບເງົາ, ບົດຄວາມ(ບົດບັນທຶກ) . ເຊິ່ງສ່ວນໃຫຍ່ຂອງການນຳສະເໜີແມ່ນຈະເນັ້ນໜັກໃນດ້ານການທ່ອງທ່ຽວ ແລະ ມີຂ່າວສານບ້ານເມືອງເປັນບາງເວລາ. ປະຫວັດ Laos Pictures ຮູບພາບປະເທດລາວ ໄດ້ຖືກສ້າງຕັ້ງຂື້ນທຳອິດໃນວັນທີ 15 ກໍລະກົດ 2012 ໂດຍການສ້າງໜ້າເທິງ Facebook ແລະ ຫຼັງຈາກນັ້ນກໍ່ໄດ້ມີການຕໍ່ຍອດເປັນເຄືອຂ່າຍໃນຫຼາຍເວັບໄຊ໌ສັງຄົມອອນລາຍເຊັ່ນ: Twitter, Youtube, Instagram, Google+ ແລະອື່ນໆ ເພື່ອເປັນການເພີ່ມຊ່ອງທາງໃນການເຂົ້າເຖິງເຄືອຂ່າຍຂອງ Laos Pictures ຮູບພາບປະເທດລາວ ໃນຫຼາຍຊ່ອງທາງ. ຈຸດປະສົງ Laos Pictures ຮູບພາບປະເທດລາວ ຖືກສ້າງຕັ້ງຂື້ນພາຍໃຕ້ຄວາມຮັບຜິດຊອບຂອງກຸ່ມຄົນທີ່ບໍ່ຂື້ນກັບອົງກອນໃດ ເຊິ່ງມີຈຸດປະສົງຫຼັກທີ່ສຳຄັນທີ່ສຸດຄື ການນຳສະເໜີ ປະເທດລາວ ໃຫ້ເປັນທີ່ຮູ້ຈັກຫຼາຍຂື້ນຂອງຄົນໃນຊາດ ແລະ ຕ່າງປະເທດ ຜ່ານເວັບໄຊ໌ສັງຄົມອອນລາຍຕ່າງໆທີ່ເປັນທີ່ນິຍົມຂອງຄົນສັງຄົມໃນຍຸກປັດຈຸບັນ. ອ້າງອີງ ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ສັງຄົມ ການທ່ອງທ່ຽວ ຮູບພາບ ການຖ່າຍຮູບ ຮູບເງົາ ຂ່າວສານ ອິນເຕີເນັດ
__label__lo ຣາຢາ ແລະ ມັງກອນໂຕສຸດທ້າຍ () ເປັນຮູບເງົາແອນິເມຊັນແນວແຟນຕາຊີຜະຈົນໄພສັນຊາດອາເມຣິກາທີ່ຜະລິດໂດຍວໍລ ດິສນີ ພິກເຈີ ແລະ ວໍລ ດິສນີ ແອນິເມຊັນ ສະຕູດິໂອສ໌ ຈັດຈຳໜ່າຍໂດຍວໍລ ດິສນີ ສະຕູດິໂອສ໌ ໂມຊັນ ພິກເຈີ ໂດນເປັນຮູບເງົາລຳດັບທີ 59 ທີ່ສ້າງໂດຍສະຕູດິໂອນີ້ ກຳກັບໂດຍດອນ ຮໍລ ແລະ ຄາລອສ ໂລເປຊ ເອັສຕຣາດາ ໂດຍມີພໍລ໌ ບຣິກສ໌ ແລະ ຈອນ ຣິປາ ຮ່ວມກຳກັບ ອຳນວຍການສ້າງໂດຍອັອສນັດ ຊູເຣີ ແລະ ປີເຕີ ເດລເວໂຄ ຂຽນບົດໂດຍກຸຍ ຫງວຽນ ແລະ ອະເດລ ລິມ ແລະ ດົນຕີປະກອບແຕ່ງໂດຍເຈມ ນິວຕັນ ຮໍເວີດ ຮູບເງົາເລື່ອງນີ້ນັກສະແດງຊາວອາເມຣິກາເຊື້ອສາຍອາຊີເກືອບທັງໝົດລວມເຖິງສຽງພາກຂອງເຄວລີ ມາຣີ ທຣານ ໃນບົດຣາຢາ ແລະ ອະຄວາຟິນາ ໃນບົດຊີຊູ ມັງກອນໂຕສຸດທ້າຍ ພ້ອມດ້ວຍເຈມມາ ຊານ, ແດນຽລ ແດ ຄິມ, ຄວານດຣາ ໂອຫ໌, ເບເນເດກ ພວ່ອງ, ໄອແຊັກ ຫວັງ, ທາເລຍ ທຣານ ແລະ ອະລັນ ທູດິກ ຣາຢາ ແລະ ມັງກອນໂຕສຸດທ້າຍ ມີກຳນົດເຂົ້າສາຍໃນປະເທດລາວໃນວັນທີ 4 ມີນາ 2021 ແລະ ສະຫະລັດອາເມຣິກາວັນທີ 5 ມີນາ 2021 ນອກຈາກນີ້ຮູບເງົາເລື່ອງນີ້ຈະເຂົ້າສາຍພ້ອມກັນໃນດິສນີ+ ດ້ວຍພຣີເມຍແອັກເຊນ ຈາກຜົນກະທົບຂອງການລະບາດທົ່ວຂອງໂຄໂຣນາໄວຣັສ 2019-2020 ທີ່ມີຕໍ່ໂຮງຮູບເງົາທົ່ວສະຫະລັດອາເມຣິກາເຊິ່ງແຫ່ງຍັງຄົງປິດຢູ່ ອ້າງອີງ ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ຮູບເງົາ ນັກພາກ
__label__lo ເຂື່ອນບ້ານຕັນ 1 ແມ່ນ ເຂື່ອນໄຟຟ້າຂະໜາດນ້ອຍແຫ່ງໜຶ່ງ ຕັ້ງຢູ່ເມືອງຄູນ ແຂວງຊຽງຂວາງ ປະເທດລາວ. ລາຍລະອຽດຕົ້ນຕໍ ເຄື່ອງຈັກປັ່ນໄຟຟ້າຂະໜາດ 5 ກິໂລວັດ 1 ເຄື່ອງ ລວມກຳລັງແຮງ 0.005 ເມກາວັດ (ສ້າງສຳເລັດ 1994) ເອກະສານອ້າງອີງ ພະແນກສະຖິຕິ ແລະ ແຜນການ, ກະຊວງອຸດສາຫະກຳ ແລະ ຫັດຖະກຳ, ສະຖິຕິອຸດສາຫະກຳ ປີ 2000 ເຂື່ອນພະລັງງານໄຟຟ້ານ້ຳຕົກ ພະລັງງານ
__label__lo ເອກວາດໍ (, ; ; ) ຫຼື ຊື່ຢ່າງເປັນທາງການແມ່ນ ສາທາລະນະລັດເອກວາດໍ (, ; ; ) ເປັນປະເທດໃນພາກຕາເວັນຕົກສຽງເໜືອຂອງທະວີບອາເມຣິກາໃຕ້ ມີອານາເຂດຕິດກັບປະເທດໂກໂລມບີທາງທິດເໜືອ ຕິດກັບປະເທດເປຣູທາງທິດຕາເວັນອອກ ແລະ ທິດໃຕ້ ແລະ ຕິດກັບມະຫາສະໝຸດປາຊີຟິກທາງທິດຕາເວັນຕົກ ເອກວາດໍຍັງມີອຳນາດອະທິປະໄຕເໜືອໝູ່ເກາະກາລາປາໂກດ (ກຸ່ມເກາະໂກລົງ) ໃນມະຫາສະໝຸດປາຊີຟິກ ເຊິ່ງຢູ່ຫ່າງຈາກແຜ່ນດິນໃຫຍ່ໄປທາງຕາເວັນຕົກປະມານ 1,000 ກິໂລແມັດ (621 ໄມລ໌) ເມຶອງຫຼວງຂອງປະເທດແມ່ນກີໂຕ. ອ້າງອີງ ເອກົວດໍ
__label__lo ຣາຟາເອລ ໂອໂຣສໂກ (ພາສາແອສປາໂຍລ: Rafael Orozco Maestre) (24 ມີນາ ຄ.ສ. 1954 – 11 ມິຖຸນາ ຄ.ສ. 1992) ນັກຮ້ອງ ແລະນັກຂຽນເພງຊາວໂຄລໍາເບຍ. ລາວເປັນຫນຶ່ງໃນຜູ້ຕາງຫນ້າທີ່ດີທີ່ສຸດຂອງດົນຕີໂຄລໍາເບຍ, ຜູ້ກໍ່ຕັ້ງແລະນັກຮ້ອງນໍາຂອງກຸ່ມ (Binomio de Oro). ດ້ວຍວົງດົນຕີນີ້, ລາວໄດ້ຊະນະ 16 ບັນທຶກທອງຄໍາແລະສອງແຜ່ນສຽງ platinum ສໍາລັບການຂາຍຫຼາຍບັນທຶກທົ່ວໂລກ. ໂອໂຣສໂກ ໄດ້ເສຍຊີວິດໃນອາຍຸ 38 ປີ, ຫຼັງຈາກທີ່ລາວຖືກຂ້າຕາຍໂດຍຜູ້ຄ້າຢາເສບຕິດຢູ່ນອກເຮືອນຂອງລາວໃນຄືນວັນທີ 11 ເດືອນມິຖຸນາ 1992. ອ້າງອີງ ນັກຮ້ອງໂຄລໍາເບຍ
__label__lo ອາສາສະໝັກ () ແມ່ນຜູ້ທີ່ສະໝັກໃຈເຮັດວຽກເພື່ອປະໂຫຍດຂອງປະຊາຊົນແລະສັງຄົມ ໂດຍບໍ່ຫວັງຜົນຕອບແທນໃດໆ ຫຼື ບຸກຄົນທີ່ອາສາເຂົ້າມາຊ່ວຍເຫຼືອສັງຄົມດ້ວຍຄວາມສະໝັກໃຈ ເສຍສະຫຼະ ເພື່ອຊ່ວຍເຫຼືອຜູ້ອື່ນ ປ້ອງກັນ ແກ້ໄຂບັນຫາ ແລະພັດທະນາສັງຄົມ ໂດຍບໍ່ຫວັງຜົນຕອບແທນ.
__label__lo ພາສາຄູເພໂຍ ແມ່ນພາສາຢູໂທ-ແອສະເທັກພາສາໜຶ່ງ ອັນບໍ່ມີຜູ້ເວົ້າແລ້ວ. ເມື່ອກ່ອນເຈົ້າຂອງພາສານີ້ແມ່ນຄົນຄູເພໂຍຈາກແຄລິຟໍເນຍຕອນໃຕ້ຂອງສະຫະລັດອະເມລິກາ ຜູ້ບັດດຽວນີ້ເວົ້າແຕ່ພາສາອັງກິດ. ໂຣສຊິນດາ ໂນລາສເກັສ ເປັນຜູ້ເວົ້າພາສານີ້ເປັນຄົນສຸດທ້າຍ. ພາສາ
__label__lo ຜົນກຳໄລ ຫຼື ກຳໄລ ແມ່ນສິ່ງທີໄດ້ມາຈາກການດຳເນີນງານໃດໜຶ່ງ ຫຼື ເຮັດສິ່ງໃດໜຶ່ງ ເຊີ່ງກຳໄລນີ້ ແມ່ນຈະໄດ້ ຈາກການ ເອົາຕົ້ນທຶນ ລົບ ກັບລາຍຈ່າຍ ຖ້າເປັນ ບວກ ກໍໝາຍຄວາມວ່າ ໄດ້ກຳໄລ ແຕ່ ຖ້າຫາກ ອອກເປັນຄ່າ ລົບ ນັ້ນແມ່ນ ຂາດທຶນ
__label__lo ປະທານປະເທສ ເປັນປະມຸຂຣັຖແຫ່ງສາທາຣນຣັຖປະຊາທິປະໄຕຍ໌ປະຊາຊົນລາວ ແມ່ນສພາແຫ່ງຊາຕເປັນຜູ້ເລືອກຕັ້ງໂດຍຮັບຄະແນນສຽງ ຢ່າງໜ້ອຍສອງສ່ວນສາມຂອງຈຳນວນ ສມາຊິກສພາແຫ່ງຊາຕທີ່ເຂົ້າຮ່ວມກອງປະຊູມ ປະທານປະເທສມີອາຍຸກາຣເທົ່າກັບອາຍຸກາຣຂອງສພາແຫ່ງຊາຕ ປະທານປະເທສ ມີຮອງປະທານປະເທສຊື່ງແມ່ນສພາແຫ່ງຊາຕເປັນຜູ້ເລືອກຕັ້ງໂດຍໄດ້ຮັບຄະແນນສຽງຫຼາຍກວ່າ ເຄີ່ງໜື່ງຂອງຈຳນວນສມາຊິກສພາແຫ່ງຊາຕທີ່ເຂົ້າຮ່ວມກອງປະຊູມ ຮອງປະທານປະເທສປຕິບັຕຕາມໜ້າທີ່ກາຣມອບໝາຍຂອງປະທານປະເທສ ແລະ ຕາງໜ້າໃຫ້ປະທານປະເທສໃນເວລາປະທານປະເທສຕິດຂັດ ປະທານປະເທດ
__label__lo ກັນນິກາ ທຳມະເກສອນ ເກິດ 11 ສິງຫາ 1947 ເປນນັກສະແດງຊາວໄທ ผลงานละคร ผู้ชนะสิบทิศ (2519) รับบท อเทตยา พล นิกร กิมหงวน (2520) รับบทประไพ ทัดดาวบุษยา (2520) รับบท ทัดดาวบุษยา คุ้มผาคำ (2521) รับบท เมทินี กรวิก ลูกทาส (2522) รับบท บุญเจิม ผลงานพิธีกร พิธีกรรายการแม่บ้านที่รัก ทางไทยทีวีสีช่อง 3 (2522 - 2530) พิธีกรรายการทีวีวาที ทางช่อง 9 อ.ส.ม.ท. พิธีกรรายการกฎแห่งกรรม ทาง ททบ.5 พิธีกรรายการโต้คารมมัธยมศึกษา ทางไทยทีวีสีช่อง 3 ผลิตรายการ ซูเปอร์จิ๋ว ทางช่อง 9 อ.ส.ม.ท. ปัจจุบัน ผลิตโดย บริษัท ซูเปอร์จิ๋วจำกัด พืธีกรรายการ กรรณิกาเซย์ เสน่ห์ทอล์ค ร่วมกับ อ.เสน่ห์ ศรีสุวรรณ์ ทางช่อง เอ็มวีทีวี ນັກສະແດງໄທ ບົດຄວາມກ່ຽວກັບ ຊີວະປະຫວັດ ທີ່ຍັງບໍ່ສົມບູນ ບຸກຄົນຈາກບາງກອກ ບຸກຄົນທີ່ຍັງມີຊີວິດຢູ່ ພິທີກອນໄທ ຜູ້ປະກາດຂ່າວຊ່ອງ 9-ໂມເດິ້ນໄນນ໌
__label__lo ພຣະບາດສົມເດັດພຣະເຈົ້າມະຫາຊີວິດສີສວ່າງວົງສ໌ (ຄຳເຄົ້າ: ພຣະບາທສົມເດັຈພຣະເຈົ້າມຫາຊີວິຕສຣີສວ່າງວົງສ໌) ຊົງເປັນພຣະມະຫາກະສັດອົງທີ 12 ແຫ່ງຣາຊອານາຈັກລ້ານຊ້າງຫຼວງພຣະບາງ ແລະ ພຣະມຫາກສັຕຣິຍ໌ພຣະອົງຄ໌ແຮກ ແຫ່ງພຣະຣາຊອານາຈັກລາວ ສເດັຈພຣະຣາຊສົມພົບ ທີ່ນຄຣຫຼວງພຣະບາງ ເມື່ອວັນທີ 14 ກໍຣະກົດ ຄ.ສ 1885 ຊົງເປັນພຣະຣາຊໂອຣົສ ໃນ ພຣະເຈົ້າສັກກະຣິນ ແລະ ພຣະນາງທອງສີ ພຣະບາດສົມເດັດພຣະເຈົ້າມະຫາສີວິທາ ລ້ານຊ້າງຮົ່ມຂາວ ພຣະຣາຊອານາຈັກລາວ ບໍຣົມມະເຊດຖາ ຂັດຕິຍະສຸຣິຍະວໍຣະມັນ ພຣະມະຫາສີສວ່າງວໍຣະມັນ (ຄຳເຄົ້າ: ພຣະບາທສົມເດັຈພຣະເຈົ້າມຫາສຣີວິທາ ລ້ານຊ້າງຮົ່ມຂາວ ພຣະຣາຊອານາຈັກລາວ ບໍຣົມເຊສຖາ ຂັຕິຍສຸຣິຍວໍຣມັນ ພຣະມຫາສຣີສວ່າງວໍຣມັນ; ອັງກິດ: Samdach Brhat Chao Maha Sri Vitha Lan Xang Hom Khao Phra Rajanachakra Lao Parama Sidha Khattiya Suriya Varman Brhat Maha Sri Savangsa Varman) ຫຼື ພຣະເຈົ້າມະຫາຊີວິດສີສວ່າງວົງສ໌ ເຈົ້າມະຫາຊີວິດສີສວ່າງວົງສ໌ ສະເດັດຂຶ້ນຄອງຣາຊສົມບັດ ເປັນພຣະມະຫາກະສັດແຫ່ງຣາຊອານາຈັກລ້ານຊ້າງຫຼວງພຣະບາງ ເມື່ອວັນທີ 15 ເມສາ ຄ.ສ 1904 ເມື່ອປະເທດລາວໄດ້ຮັບເອກກະຣາດ ຈາກຝຣັ່ງ ພຣະອົງຈິ່ງຊົງເປັນພຣະມະຫາກະສັດພຣະອົງທຳອິດ ແຫ່ງຣາຊອານາຈັກລາວ ເຈົ້າມະຫາຊີວິດສີສວ່າງວົງ ສະເດັດສວັນຄົດ ເມື່ອວັນທີ 29 ຕຸລາ ຄ.ສ 1959. ຄົນລາວ
__label__lo ເກ () ຫມາຍເຖິງ ບຸກຄົນຮັກຮ່ວມເພດ ເດີມທີໝາຍຄວາມວ່າ "ບໍ່ເປັນຫ່ວງ" "ມີຄວາມສຸກ" ຫຼື "ສົດໃສ" ໃນຄຣິຕທົດສະວັດທີ່ 1960 ຄຳວ່າ ເກ ໄດ້ກາຍເປັນຄໍາທີ່ນິຍົມໃນກຸ່ມຜູ້ຊາຍຮັກຮ່ວມເພດ ແລະ ໄດ້ຖືກນໍາໃຊ້ຢ່າງກວ້າງຂວາງໃນປະຈຸບັນ ອ້າງອີງ ເກ ເພດສຶກສາ ຄວາມຮັກ ຮັກຮ່ວມເພດ
__label__lo ອັກສອນມອນ ພັດທະນາມາຈາກອັກສອນພາໝີ ຜ່ານທາງອັກສອນປັນລະວະ ແລະເປັນແມ່ແບບຂອງອັກສອນອື່ນ ເຊັ່ນ ອັກສອນພະມ່າ ອັກສອນໄທ ອັກສອນລາວ ອັກສອນລ້ານນາ ອັກສອນໄທລື້ ອັກສອນທໍາທີ່ໃຊ້ຂຽນຄັມພີໃນລ້ານນາແລະລ້ານຊ້າງ ອັກສອນພະມ່າ ບໍ່ສາມາດໃຊ້ແທນ ອັກສອນມອນໄດ້ ແຕ່ອັກສອນມອນນັ້ນ ສາມາດໃຊ້ແທນ ອັກສອນພະມ່າໄດ້ ມອນ
__label__lo ບໍລິສັດ ເອັນເອພີ ເຊີວິສ ແອນດ໌ ເທຣດດິ້ງ ຈຳກັດ ເປັນບໍລິສັດໃຫ້ບໍລິການຮັບທຳຄວາມສະອາດ ອາຄານ ທີ່ຢູ່ອາໄສ ຫ້າງຊັບພະສິນຄ້າ ແລະຫ້ອງການທັງພາກລັດແລະເອກະຊົນ ຖືກສ້າງຕັ້ງຂື້ນໃນຕົ້ນປີ 2014 ປັດຈຸບັນຍັງໄດ້ໃຫ້ການບໍລິການຢູ່ຫລາຍສະຖານທີ່ເຊັ່ນ: ສູນການຄ້າວຽງຈັນເຊັນເຕີ້, ສະກາຍຊຸບເປີ້ມາເກັດ, ຣິມປິງຊຸບເປີ້ມາເກັດ ແລະ ອີກຫລາຍໆພາກສ່ວນ ໂດຍເນັ້ນໃສ່ການໃຫ້ບໍລິການຄຸນະພາບ, ນຳໃຊ້ວັດສະດຸ ອຸປະກອນ ແລະ ເຄື່ອງຈັກທີ່ທັນສະໄໝເຂົ້າໃນການປະຕິບັດງານທຸກໆຂັ້ນຕອນ ເພື່ອເປັນການລົດຈຳນວນບຸກຄະລາກອນລົງ ແລະ ແນໃສ່ເພີ່ມປະສິດທິພາບງານໃຫ້ຫລາຍຂື້ນເລື້ອຍໆ ຖ້າທ່ານສົນໃຈກະລຸນາຕິດຕໍ່ໄດ້ທີ່ເບີ 020 77771100 ແລະ 021 218869 ສະຖານທີ່ຕັ້ງຂອງບໍລິສັດທີ່ ເລກທີ 088/8 ບ້ານທົ່ງສ້າງນາງ ເມືອງຈັນທະບູລີ ນະຄອນຫລວງວຽງຈັນ 01000
__label__lo ກະຊວງອຸດສາຫະກຳແລະການຄ້າ ແມ່ນ ໜຶ່ງໃນອົງກອນລັດຖະບານທີ່ມີ ລັດຖະມົນຕີເປັນຫົວໜ້າ. ໜ້າວຽກຫຼັກໜຶ່ງ ຂອງ ກະຊວງອຸດສາຫະກຳແລະການຄ້າ ແມ່ນ ການປະກອບສ່ວນ ຕໍ່ການສ້າງສາພັດທະນາປະເທດຊາດ ໂດຍຜ່ານການຄຸ້ມຄອງ ແລະ ສົ່ງເສີມການດຳເນີນທຸລະກິດ, ການຄ້າ ແລະ ອຸດສາຫະກຳ ຢູ່ ພາຍໃນປະເທດ. ລິ້ງຄ໌ພາຍນອກ ກະຊວງ​ອຸດສາຫະກຳ​ແລະ​ການ​ຄ້າ ກະຊວງ ລັດຖະບານ
__label__lo ຖະໜົນ ຖະໜົນເປັນທາງສັນຈອນລະຫວ່າງສະຖານທີ່ສອງແຫ່ງ ທີ່ໄດ້ຮັບການປູພື້ນຜິວ ຫຼື ໄດ້ຮັບການປັບປຸງເພື່ອການເດີນທາງດ້ວຍການຢ່າງ ຫຼື ຍານພາຫະນະຕ່າງໆ ລວມເຖິງມ້າ ກວຽນ ລົດຖີບ ແລະ ຍານຍົນ ຖະໜົນປປະກອບດ້ວຍ ໜຶ່ງເຖິງສອງຊ່ອງທາງໄດ້ແກ່ ທິດດຽວກັນ ແລະ ທິດສວນກັນ ໂດຍແຕ່ລະຝັ່ງມີຊ່ອງສັນຈອນຕັ້ງແຕ່ໜຶ່ງຊ່ອງຂຶ້ນໄປ ແລະ ບາງຄັ້ງອາດມີທາງຢ່າງ ຖະໜົນທີ່ສ້າງມາເພື່ອສ່ວນລວມອາດເອີ້ນວ່າ: ຖະໜົນສາທາລະນະ ຫຼື ທາງຫຼວງ ພື້ນຜິວຖະໜົນ ໃນປະຈຸບັນນິຍົມສ້າງພື້ນທາງດ້ວຍ ຄອນກລີດ ຫຼື ຍາງໝາກຕອຍທີມີຄຸນນະພາບຂຶ້ນກັບລັກສະນະການໃຊ້ວຽກ ໂດຍຖະໜົນຄອນກລີດຂະມີຄ່າໃຊ້ຈ່າຍສູງກວ່າໃນການກໍ່ສ້າງ ແຕ່ຄ່າບຳລຸງຮັກສາຈະຖືກກວ່າຖະໜົນຍາງໝາກຕອຍ ລັກສະນະຂອງຜິວຖະໜົນຈະມີຄວາມຊັນອອກທາງທັງສອງຝັ່ງ ເພື່ອໃຫ້ນ້ຳໄຫຼອອກຈາກຜິວຖະໜົນໄດ້ງ່າຍໃນເວລາທີມີຝົນຕົກ ຄົມມະນາຄົມ ໂຄງລ່າງ ຫົນທາງ
__label__lo ຈໍເຈຍ ເມໂລນີ Giorgia Meloni ( Italian pronunciation: [ˈdʒordʒa meˈloːni] ; ເກີດວັນທີ 15 ມັງກອນ 1977) ເປັນນັກການເມືອງຊາວອີຕາລີ ທີ່ດຳລົງຕຳແໜ່ງເປັນ ນາຍົກລັດຖະມົນຕີ ອີຕາລີ ຕັ້ງແຕ່ວັນທີ 22 ຕຸລາ 2022, ເປັນ ຜູ້ຍິງຄົນທຳອິດ ທີ່ດຳລົງຕຳແໜ່ງນີ້. ເປັນ ສະມາຊິກ​ສະພາ ຕ່ຳ​ນັບ​ແຕ່​ປີ 2006, ນາງ​ໄດ້​ນຳພາ​ພັກ​ການ​ເມືອງ Brothers of Italy (FdI) ນັບ​ແຕ່​ປີ 2014, ​ແລະ ​ນາງ​ເຄີຍ​ດຳລົງ​ຕຳ​ແໜ່​ງ​ເປັນ​ປະທານ ​ພັກ​ອະນຸລັກ​ນິຍົມ ​ແລະ ປະຕິ​ຮູບ​ເອີລົບ ນັບ​ແຕ່​ປີ 2020. ບຸກຄົນທີ່ຍັງມີຊີວິດຢູ່ ບຸກຄົນທີ່ເກີດໃນປີ ພ.ສ. 2520
__label__lo ສິນລະປະ (ຄຳເຄົ້າ: ສິລປະ, ) ແມ່ນ ການສ້າງ,​ການສະແດງອອກໂດຍ ບໍ່ວ່າ ຈະແມ່ນ ດ້ວຍການຂີດຂຽນ, ແຕ້ມ, ປັ້ນ, ຫຼໍ່, ຫລື ດ້ວຍ ການເຄື່ອນຍ້າຍຮ່າງກາຍ, ວັດຖຸ ຫຼື ແມ່ນແຕ່ ສຽງ, ຈັງຫວະ. ໂດຍທົ່ວໄປ ສິນລະປະ ຈະຖືກ ສະແດງອອກ ເພື່ອ ຄວາມພໍໃຈ ຂອງ ຜູ້ຊົມ, ຜູ້ຟັງລວມທັງ ຜູ້ກະທຳ. ອ້າງອີງ ສິລະປະ
__label__lo ຊຸບເປີ້ວາຍ () ເປັນກາຕູນເພື່ອການສຶກສາຂອງສະຫະລັດອາເມລິກາ ທາງຊ່ອງ PBS Kids ອອກອາກາດຕອນທຳອິດເມື່ອວັນທີ່ 3 ກັນຍາ 2007 ເຖີງວັນທີ່ 11 ຕຸລາ 2012 ຕໍ່ມາໄດ້ອອກອາກາດອີກເທື່ອເມື່ອວັນທີ່ 17 ສິງຫາ 2015 ເຖີງວັນທີ່ 12 ພຶດສະພາ 2016 ປະຈຸບັນທັງຫມົດມີ 3 ລຶດູການ ແລະ 103 ຕອນ ຕັວລະຄອນ ຊຸບເປີ້ຣີດເດີ້ ວາຍແອັດ () ວອນເດີ້ ເຣ້ດ () ອັນຟ່າ ພິກ () ເຈ້າຍິງພີ () ວຸບສະເຕີ້ () ກາຕູນອາເມຣິກັນ ໂທລະພາບການາດາ
__label__lo ມິສແກຣນຊູຣິນາມ (ອັງກິດ : Miss Grand Suriname) ເປັນການປະກວດນາງງາມລະດັບປະເທດ ຈັດຂຶ້ນເພື່ອຄັດເລືອກຕົວແທນສາວລາວເຂົ້າຮ່ວມປະກວດ ມິສແກຣນອິນເຕີຣ໌ເນຊັນແນລ ໃນແຕ່ລະປີ ລາຍຊື່ຜູ້ໄດ້ຮັບຕຳແໜ່ງ ບ້ານເກີດຂອງຜູ້ຊະນະ ຕຳແໜ່ງຮອງຊະນະເລີດ ຜົນການປະກວດລະດັບນານາຊາດ ປຸ່ມສີ : ຜູ້ຊະນະ : ຮອງຊະນະເລີດ ຫລື ເຂົ້າຮອບ 5 ຄົນສຸດທ້າຍ/ເຂົ້າຮອບ 6 ຄົນສຸດທ້າຍ ອັນດັບທຳອິດ : ເຂົ້າຮອບ ຫລື ຮອບຮອງຊະນະເລີດ (ເຂົ້າຮອບ 10 ຄົນສຸດທ້າຍ/ເຂົ້າຮອບ 20 ຄົນສຸດທ້າຍ) : ລາງວັນພິເສດ ມິສແກຣນອິນເຕີຣ໌ເນຊັນແນລ ເພີ່ມເຕີມ ມິສແກຣນອິນເຕີຣ໌ເນຊັນແນລ ອ້າງອິງ ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ເວບໄຊທ໌ທາງການຂອງມິສແກຣນອິນເຕີຣ໌ເນຊັນແນລ ການປະກວດມິສແກຣນອິນເຕີຣ໌ເນຊັນແນລແບ່ງຕາມປະເທດ ແມ່ແບບການປະກວດນາງງາມ ການປະກວດນາງງາມ ໂກລໂບ້ວ ບິວຕີ້
__label__lo ສະຫະລັດອາເມຣິກາ (; ຫຍໍ້ເປັນ: U.S.A. ຫຼື USA) ໂດຍທົ່ວໄປເອີ້ນວ່າ ສະຫະລັດ (United States: ຫຍໍ້ເປັນ: U.S. ຫຼື US) ຫຼື ອາເມຣິກາ (America: ຫຍໍ້ເປັນ: A) ເປັນສະຫະພັນສາທາລະນະລັດເຊິ່ງຕັ້ງຢູ່ໃນທະວີບອາເມຣິກາເໜືອ ປະກອບດ້ວຍລັດ 50 ລັດ ໜຶ່ງເຂດປົກຄອງກາງ ຫ້າດິນແດນປົກຄອງຕົນເອງສຳຄັນ ລວມທັງເຂດສະຫງວນອິນດຽນ 326 ແຫ່ງ ແລະ ໝູ່​ເກາະ​ນອກປະເທດອີກ 9 ແຫ່ງ ສະຫະລັດອາເມຣິກາມີຊາຍແດນທາງເໜືອຕິດກັບປະເທດການາດາ ແລະ ທາງທິດໃຕ້ຕິດກັບເມັກຊິກ ແລະ ຍັງມີຊາຍແດນທາງທະເລຕິດກັບຫຼາຍປະເທດເຊັ່ນ ບາຮາມາດ, ກູບາ ແລະ ລັດເຊຍ ດ້ວຍພື້ນທີ່ກວ່າ 9.8 ລ້ານຕາລາງກິໂລແມັດ ແລະ ປະຊາກອນມີທັງໝົດ 331 ລ້ານຄົນ ເຮັດໃຫ້ສະຫະລັດອາເມຣິກາມີພື້ນທີ່ຂະໜາດໃຫຍ່ເປັນອັນດັບທີ 3 ຂອງໂລກ{{efn|ສາລານຸກົມ'ບຣິຕານນິກາ'ສະແດງລາຍການປະເທດຈີນເປັນປະເທດໃຫຍ່ທີ່ສຸດອັນດັບສາມຂອງໂລກ (ຮອງຈາກປະເທດລັດເຊຍ ແລະ ການາດາ) ໂດຍມີພື້ນທີ່ທັງໝົດ 9,572,900 ຕາລາງກິໂລແມັດ ແລະ ສະຫະລັດອາເມຣິກາເປັນປະເທດທີ່ໃຫຍ່ທີ່ສຸດອັນດັບທີ 4 ໂດຍມີພື້ນທີ່ 9,526,468 ຕາລາງກິໂລແມັດ ຕົວເລກຂອງສະຫະລັດອາເມຣິກາໜ້ອຍກວ່າ ເດິ ໂວລ ແຟກທ໌ບຸກ'' ເນື່ອງຈາກວ່າບໍ່ລວມເອົາເຂດນ້ຳຊາຍຝັ່ງແລະ ນ້ຳອານາເຂດ ອ້າງອີງ ຫ້ອງສະແດງຮູບແຕ້ມ ສະຫະລັດອາເມລິກາ
__label__lo ເພົດທາຍ ວງຄຳເຫລາ ຫຼືໍ ໝ່ຳ ຈ໊ກມ໊ກ (24 ມິຖຸນາ ຄ.ສ. 1965-) ແມ່ນນັກສະແດງຕະຫຼົກຊຸປເປົ້ສະຕາຊາວໄທຈາກແກ໊ງສາມຊ່າ ພຸດທະສາສະນິກກະຊົນຊາວໄທ ນັກສະແດງຕະຫຼົກໄທ ບຸກຄົນທີ່ເກີດໃນປີ ຄ.​ສ.​ 1965 ບຸກຄົນຈາກຈັງຫວັດຍະໂສທອນ ນັກຮ້ອງໄທ ຜູ້ກຳກັບຮູບເງົາຊາວໄທ ພິທີກອນໄທ
__label__lo ລາຍຊື່ຕົວແທນຈັງຫວັດໃນການປະກວດຄວາມງາມລະດັບປະເທດ ຂອງປະເທດໄທ ຄືເວທີ ມິສແກຣນໄທແລນ, ມິສຊຸປຣາເນຊັນແນລໄທແລນ, ມິສໄທແລນ, ມິສເຕີຊຸປຣາເນຊັນແນລໄທແລນ, ມິສເຕີສະຕາໄທແລນ, ມິສເຕີທົວລິຊຶມໂວຣ໌ວໄທແລນ, ມິສເຕີອິນເຕີຣ໌ເນຊັນແນລໄທແລນ, ແມນຮັນໄທແລນ, ມິສເຕີໂວຣ໌ວໄທແລນ ແລະ ມິສເຕີຢູນີເວີສໄທແລນ ໃນລະບົບການຈັດປະກວດ 77 ຈັງຫວັດ ການປະກວດຜູ້ຫຍິງ ສັນຍະລັກສີ ຊະນະເລີດ ຮອງຊະນະເລີດ ເຂົ້າຮອບສຸດທ້າຍ ມິສແກຣນໄທແລນ ມິສໄທແລນ ມິສຊຸປຣາເນຊັນແນລໄທແລນ ການປະກວດຜູ້ຊາຍ ສັນຍະລັກສີ ຊະນະເລີດ ຮອງຊະນະເລີດ ເຂົ້າຮອບສຸດທ້າຍ ມິສເຕີອິນເຕີຣ໌ເນຊັນແນລໄທແລນ ມິສເຕີຊຸປຣາເນຊັນແນລໄທແລນ ມິສເຕີໂວຣ໌ວໄທແລນ ມິສເຕີສະຕາໄທແລນ ມິສເຕີທົວລິຊຶມໂວຣ໌ວໄທແລນ ມິສເຕີຢູນີເວີສໄທແລນ ເພີ່ມເຕີມ ລາຍຊື່ຕົວແທນປະເທດໄທໃນການປະກວດຄວາມງາມລະດັບນານາຊາດ ລາຍຊື່ຕົວແທນປະເທດໄທໃນການປະກວດຄວາມງາມຊາຍລະດັບນານາຊາດ ອ້າງອີງ ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ການປະກວດຊາຍງາມ ການປະກວດນາງງາມ ການປະກວດນາງງາມໃນປະເທດໄທ ການປະກວດຊາຍງາມໃນປະເທດໄທ ການປະກວດແບ່ງຕາມຈັງຫວັດ
__label__lo ວິຕາມິນບີ5ຫຼືກົດແພນໂທເທນິກຫຼືວິຕາມິນເບ່5ຊ່ວຍໃນການສ້າງຄວາມຈະເລີນເຕີບໂຕຂອງຮ່າງກາຍ,ຊ່ວຍສ້າງເຊວໃໝ່ແລະຊ່ວຍບໍາລຸງລະບົບປະສາດ.ຮ່າງກາຍຂອງຄົນເຮົາຕ້ອງການວິຕາມິນບີ5ຢ່າງນ້ອຍ200ມີລິກໍາ. ປະໂຫຍດຂອງວິຕາມິນບີ5ຊ່ວຍໃນການສ້າງແອນຕີ້ບໍດີເຊິ່ງເປັນຕົວສໍາຄັນຂອງພູມຄຸ້ມກັນຂອງຮ່າງກາຍ.ເມື່ອຮ່າງກາຍປ່ຽນໄຂມັນທີ່ສະສົມໄວ້ໃຫ້ເປັນນໍ້າຕານເພື່ອສ້າງພະລັງງານວິຕາມິນບີ5ຈະເປັນຕົວສໍາຄັນໃນການປ່ຽນໄຂມັນໃຫ້ເປັນນໍ້າຕານ.ຊ່ວຍໃຫ້ບາດແຜກາຍໄວຂຶ້ນ.ຊ່ວຍໃຫ້ຮ່າງກາຍຫາຍຈາກການຊັອກຫຼັງຈາກການຜ່າຕັດໃຫຍ່.ຊ່ວຍໃຫ້ອາການອ່ອນເພຍຫາຍໄວຂຶ້ນ.
__label__lo ​ນ້ຳ­ຕົກ­ຕາດ​ສະຫມອງ​ພາກ ເຊິ່ງ​ມີ​ຄວາມ​ງາມ​ບໍ່ນ້ອຍ​ຫນ້າ ນ້ຳ­ຕົກ­ຕາດ​ແສ​ຟ້າ​ແຕ່ຢ່າງ­ໃດ ເນື່ອງ​ຈາກ​ທັງ​ສອງ​ສະຖານ​ທີ່​ທ່ອງ​ທ່ຽວ​ດັ່ງ­ກ່າວ ແມ່ນລ້ວນ​ແຕ່​ກຳ­ເນີດ​ມາ​ຈາກ​ສາຍນ້ຳ​ອັນ​ດຽວ​ກັນ ລວມ​ທັງ​ຕັ້ງ​ຢູ່ທ່າມ­ກາງ​ການ​ຫຸ້ມ​ລ້ອມ​ຂອງ​ປ່າສະ­ຫງວນ​ແຫ່ງ​ຊາດ​ອັນ​ດຽວກັນ​ອີກ, ເນື່ອງ​ຈາ​ກວ່າ ນ້ຳ­ຕົກທັງ​ສອງ​ແຫ່ງ​ນີ້ມີ​ລະ­ດັບ​ນ້ຳ­ຕົກ ທີ່​ແຮງ ໂດຍ​ສະ­ເພາະ​ໃນ​ໄລ­ຍະລະ­ດູ­ຝົນ​ນີ້, ປະ­ລິ­ມານ​ນ້ຳ​ຍິ່ງ​ເພີ່ມ ຂຶ້ນ​ຫລາຍເປັນ​ອັນ­ວ່າ​ຍິ່ງ​ເພີ່ມຄວາມ​ງົດ​ງາມ​ຂຶ້ນ​ຕື່ມ​ອີກ ຖ້າ​ໃຜຫາກ​ໄປ​ທ່ຽວ​ສອງ​ສະ­ຖານ­ທີ່​ນ້ຳຕົກ​ສອງ​ແຫ່ງ​ໃນ​ໄລ­ຍະ​ນີ້​ຍິ່ງເປັນ​ການ​ດີ ຫລື ຖ້າ​ຈະ​ໄປ​ໃນຍາມ​ລະ­ດູ­ແລ້ງ​ກໍ່​ຍິ່ງ​ສະ­ດວກ ເຊິ່ງ​ກິດ­ຈະ­ກຳ​ທີ່​ປະ­ຕິ­ບັດ​ບໍ່​ພຽງ ແຕ່​ເພື່ອ​ເປັນ​ການ​ຜ່ອນ­ຄາຍ​ຈາກຄວາມ​ອິດ­ເມື່ອຍ​ເທົ່າ​ນັ້ນ ບັນ­ດາທ່ານ​ທີ່​ເຂົ້າ​ໄປ​ທ່ຽວ​ຊົມຍັງ​ສາມາດ​ສຳ­ຜັດ​ກັບ​ກິ່ນ​ອາຍ​ຂອງ​ບັນຍາ​ກາດ​ທີ່​ງຽງ​ສະ­ຫງົບສົມ­ທົບ ກັບ​ສຽງ​ຂອງ​ນ້ຳ­ຕົກ­ຕາດ​ບາດສະ​ຫມ່ຳ​ສະ­ເຫມີ​ທີ່​ຖືກ​ກະ­ທົບ​ກັບກ້ອນ​ຫີນສົ່ງ​ຟອງ​ກະ­ຈາຍ​ກວ້າງ ເຫມືອນ​ດັ່ງ​ຫມອກ​ສີ­ຂາວ​ໃນຍາມ​ເຊົ້າ​ຂອງ​ວັນ​ທີ່​ມີ​ອາ­ກາດຫນາວ​ເຢັນ ທຸກ​ຄັ້ງ​ທີ່​ໄດ້​ສຳ­ຜັດ ຖ້າ​ໄປ​ກັນ​ຫນ້ອຍ​ຄົນ​ກໍ່​ຄົງ​ບໍ່​ມີບັນ­ຍາ­ກາດ​ດີ​ປານ­ໃດ ແຕ່​ກໍ່​ຄວນກະ­ກຽມ​ທັງ​ທາງ​ອາ­ຫານ​ທ່ຽງ ແລະ ນ້ຳ​ດື່ມ ເພື່ອ​ຈະ​ໄດ້​ຊ່ວຍ​ບັນເທົາ​ໃນ​ເວ­ລາ​ເກີດ​ອາ­ການ​ຫິວຂຶ້ນ​ມາ.
__label__lo ໃນ ຄະນິດສາດ, ຈຳນວນສົນ ແມ່ນ ຈຳນວນ ທີ່ມີຮູບແບບ ໃນນີ້ a ແລະ b ແມ່ນ ຈຳນວນຈິງ ແລະ i ແມ່ນ ຈິນຕະນາຫົວໜ່ວຍ(ຈຳນວນສຳນຶກ) ທີ່ຖືກກຳໜົດ ໃຫ້ມີ ຄຸນລັກສະນະທີ່ວ່າ i 2 = −1. ຕົວຢ່າງ, 3 + 2i ແມ່ນ ຈຳນວນສົນ, ທີ່ ພາກສ່ວນຈິງ ເທົ່າກັບ 3 ແລະ ສຳປະສິດ ພາກສ່ວນຈິນຕະນາການ ເທົ່າກັບ 2. ຄະນິດສາດ ຈຳນວນ
__label__lo Punlao.com (ພັນລາວ.ຄອມ) ເປັນນຶ່ງໃນເວັບໄຊປະເພດ Social Networking Service (SNS) ທີ່ມີຊື່ສຽງໃນປະເທດລາວ. ເວັບໄຊພັນລາວເປີດຄັ້ງທຳອິດເມື່ອວັນທີ 1 ມີນາ ປີ 2008 ເຊິ່ງປັດຈຸບັນດຳເນີນການພາຍໃຕ້ຊື່ບໍລິສັດ Utth Media Creation Co., Ltd.. ໃນເດືອນທັນວາ ປີ 2011 ພັນລາວມີສະມາຊິກຫຼາຍກວ່າ 20,000 ຄົນ ແລະມີຜູ່ເຂົ້າຊົມຫຼາຍກວ່າ 1,000 ຄົນຕໍ່ມື້ ໂດຍທີ່ຈຳນວນ pageview ຕໍ່ມື້ສູງເຖິງ 40,000 ຄັ້ງຕໍ່ມື້. ລິ້ງທີ່ກ່ຽວຂ້ອງ ເວັບໄຊ Punlao.com U-Punlao's blog (blog ຢ່າງບໍ່ເປັນທາງການໂດຍສະມາຊິກພັນລາວ) @punlao ອ້າງອີງ ພັນລາວ.ຄອມ, 28/10/2018.
__label__lo ຕຳນານ (, , ລາແຕັງ: legenda ໝາຍເຖິງ "ອ່ານເພື່ອຄຶດ") ແມ່ນ ເລື່ອງເລົ່າຂານທີ່ມີມາແຕ່ອະດີດ ປຽບໄດ້ຄ້າຍຄືເຄື່ອງມືທີ່ຊ່ອຍຖ່າຍທອດເລື່ອງລາວທາງປະຫວັດສາດ ເຊິ່ງເລື່ອງລາວເຫຼົ່ານີ້ສະທ້ອນໃຫ້ເຫັນເຖິງວິຖີຊີວິດ ຄວາມຄຶດ ຄວາມເຊື່ອ ລວມເຖິງປະເພນີຕ່າງໆ ຂອງຄນໃນຍຸກອະດີດ. ອ້າງອີງ ບັນນານຸກົມ Hippolyte Delehaye, The Legends of the Saints: An Introduction to Hagiography (1907), Chapter I: Preliminary Definitions, et passim Karl Kerenyi, The Heroes of the Greeks (1959) Catholic Encyclopedia article Literary or Profane Legends Timothy R. Tangherlini, "'It Happened Not Too Far from Here...': A Survey of Legend Theory and Characterization" Western Folklore 49.4 (October 1990:371-390). A condensed survey with extensive bibliography. ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ຕຳນານ
__label__lo ແຂວງໂຄລາດ (, ຈັງຫວັດນຄຣຣາຊສີມາ) ຫຼືຮູ້ຈັກໃນຊື່ ໂຄລາດ (, ໂຄຣາຊ) ແມ່ນຈັງຫວັດທີ່ມີພື້ນທີ່ຫຼາຍທີ່ສຸດໃນປະເທດໄທແລະມີປະຊາກອນຫຼາຍເປັນອັນດັບ 2 ຂອງປະເທດ ຢູ່ໃນພາກຕາເວັນອອກສຽງເໜືອ. ມີອານາເຂດຕິດກັບຈັງຫວັດຂອນແກ່ນ ຈັງຫວັດໄຊຍະພູມ ຈັງຫວັດບຸລີລຳ ຈັງຫວັດລົບບຸລີ ຈັງຫວັດສະລະບຸລີ ຈັງຫວັດນະຄອນນາຍົກ ຈັງຫວັດປາຈີນບຸລີ ແລະຈັງຫວັດສະແກ້ວ. ຈັງຫວັດນະຄອນລາຊະສີມາ ຈັງຫວັດໃນປະເທດໄທ
__label__lo ເທສລາ ( ເມື່ອກ່ອນ "ເທສະລາມໍເຕີ") ແມ່ນບໍລິສັດຂອງສະຫະລັດອາເມລິກາ ອອກແບບ ຜະລິດແລະຈຳໜ່າຍລົດພະລັງງານໄຟຟ້າແລະສ່ວນປະກອບລະບົບສົ່ງກຳລັງຂອງຍານພາຫະນະໄຟຟ້າ. ແມ່ນບໍລິສັດມະຫາຊົນ ມີຊື່ທາງການຄ້າໃນຕະຫຼາດຫຼັກຊັບແນສະແດັກວ່າ TESLA. ເຮັດກຳໄລເທື່ອທໍາອິດໃນຊ່ວງໄຕມາດທໍາອິດຂອງປີ ຄ.ສ. 2013 ໂດຍບໍລິສັດມີພາລະກິດຫຼັກແມ່ນ ກະຕຸ້ນໃຫ້ເກີດການເຂົ້າສູ່ຍຸກການເດີນທາງທີ່ຍັ່ງຍືນ (Accelerate the World’s Transition to Sustainable Transport). ປັດຈຸບັນປະທານບໍລິຫານບໍລິສັດ (ຊີອີໂອ) ແມ່ນ ອີລອນ ມັດ. ເທສະລາໄດ້ຮັບຊື່ສຽງແຜ່ຫຼາຍເທື່ອທໍາອິດຫຼັງໄດ້ເລີ່ມຈຳໜ່າຍລົດເທສະລາ ໂລດສະເຕີ, ລົດສະປອດໄຟຟ້າຄັນທໍາອິດ, ລົດຄັນທີສອງຂອງບໍລິສັດແມ່ນເທສະລາ ໂມເດວເອັດ, ລົດເກງຫຼູຫຼາທີ່ໃຊ້ພະລັງງານໄຟຟ້າ, ເທສະລາ ໂມເດວເອັກ ແລະລົດ SUV ຄັນທໍາອິດ ເປັນຕົ້ນ. ອ້າງອີງ ບໍລິສັດລົດ ຍີ່ຫໍ້ລົດ
__label__lo ພາສາອີສານ ຫຼື ພາສາລາວອີສານ ຫຼື ພາສາໄທຖິ່ນຕາເວັນອອກສຽງເໜືອ ຫຼື​ ທີ່​ນິຍົມ​ກ່າວ​ເຖິງໃນ​ເອກະສານ​ທາງ​ການ​ຂອງ​ໄທ​ວ່າ ພາສາໄທຖິ່ນອີສານ ເປັນການພັດທະນາໃນທ້ອງຖິ່ນຂອງພາສາລາວໃນປະເທດໄທ ຜູ້ເວົ້າທ້ອງຖິ່ນຍັງຄົງຄິດວ່າເປັນພາສາລາວລັດ​ຖະ​ບານ​ໄທ​ຍອມຮັບ​ພາ​ສາ​ນີ້​ເປັນ​ສໍາ​ນ​ຽງພາສາ​ໄທ​ ທັງຊາວ​ໄທ​ ແລະ​ ລາວ​ມີ​ຄວາມ​ເຂົ້າ​ໃຈ​ກັນ​ຍາກ ເນື່ອງຈາກວ່າເຖິງແມ່ນວ່າມີຫຼາຍກ່ວາ 80 ເປີເຊັນຂອງຄໍາສັບຕ່າງໆໃນວັດຈະນານຸກົມ ທັງລາວ ແລະ ອີສານ ມີຫຼາຍລະດັບສຽງສຽງທີ່ແຕກຕ່າງກັນ ແລະມັກໃຊ້ຄໍາທີ່ມາຈາກພາສາໄທ ດັ່ງນັ້ນຈຶ່ງເຮັດໃຫ້ເກີດການຂັດຂວາງຄວາມເຂົ້າໃຈເຊິ່ງກັນ ແລະ ກັນໂດຍບໍ່ມີການເປີດເຜີຍກ່ອນ ອ້າງອີງ =
__label__lo ມິສແກຣນສຸໂຂໄທ 2018 (ໄທ: มิสแกรนด์สุโขทัย 2018) (ອັງກິດ: Miss Grand Sukhothai 2018) ເປັນການຈັດການປະກວດນາງງາມສຸໂຂໄທ ຄັ້ງທີ່ 2 ເພື່ອເປັນຕົວແທນຈັງຫວັດສຸໂຂໄທ ເຈົ້າຮ່ວມປະກາດມິສແກຣນໄທແລນ 2018 ຜົນການປະກວດ ລາງວັນພິເສດ ຜູ້ເຂົ້າປະກວດ ອ້າງອີງ ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ມິສແກຣນໄທແລນ ແມ່ແບບການປະກວດນາງງາມ ການປະກວດແບ່ງຕາມຈັງຫວັດ ການປະກວດນາງງາມ ການປະກວດນາງງາມໃນປະເທດໄທ
__label__lo ລົດໄຟຟ້າມະຫານະຄອນ ສາຍສະເຫຼີມລັດຊະມົງຄົນ ນິຍົມເອີ່ນວ່າ ລົດໄຟຟ້າສາຍສີນ້ຳເງີນ (ອັງກິດ : Metropolitan Rapid Transit Chaloem Ratchamongkhon Line, MRT Blue Line) ເຊີ່ງເອີ່ນຕາມສີທີ່ຖືກກຳນົດໄວ້ໃນແຜນໂຄງການລະບົບຂົນສົ່ງມວນຊົນໃນບາງກອກແລະໃນພື້ນທີ່ໃກ້ຄຽງ ເລີ່ມສ້າງໃນປີ 1999 ເປັນເສັ້ນທາງລົດໄຟຟ້າໃຕ້ດິນສາຍທຳອິດໃນປະເທດໄທ ເຊີ່ງມີບໍລິສັດ ທາງດ່ວນແລະລົດໄຟຟ້າກຸງເທບ ຈຳກັດ (ມະຫາຊົນ) ໄດ້ຮັບສັມປະທານການເດິນລົດຈາກ ການລົດໄຟຟ້າຂົນສົ່ງມວນຊົນແຫ່ງປະເທດໄທ ລາຍລະອຽດ ຊື່ແຕ່ລະສະຖານີ ອ້າງອີງ ຍານພາຫະນະ ລົດໄຟ ລົດໄຟຟ້າໃນປະເທດໄທ
__label__lo ຈັງຫວັດພິດສະນຸໂລກ () ແມ່ນຈັງຫວັດໜຶ່ງຂອງປະເທດໄທ. ມີຂະໜາດໃຫຍ່ຕັ້ງຢູ່ໃນເຂດພາກເໜືອຕອນລຸ່ມມີປະຫວັດສາດອັນຍາວນານຄວບຄູ່ກັບປະເທດໄທ ໂດຍມີຊື່ເອີ້ນຕ່າງໆ ກັນໃນສິລາຈາລຶກ ຕຳນານ ນິທານ ແລະພົງສາວະດານ ເຊັ່ນ ສອງແຄວ ແລະ ສອງແຄວທະວິສາຂະ. ເດີມເມືອງພິດສະນຸໂລກແມ່ນເມືອງເກົ່າສະໄໝຂອມ ຢູ່ຫ່າງຈາກທີ່ຕັ້ງເມືອງປັດຈຸບັນລົງໄປທາງທິດໃຕ້ປະມານ 5 ກິໂລແມັດ ເອີ້ນວ່າ "ເມືອງສອງແຄວ". ທີ່ເອີ້ນເຊັ່ນນີ້ ຍ້ອນຕັ້ງຢູ່ລະຫວ່າງແມ່ນ້ຳສອງສາຍ ແມ່ນ ແມ່ນ້ຳນ່ານ ກັບແມ່ນ້ຳແຄວນ້ອຍ ແຕ່ປັດຈຸບັນແມ່ນ້ຳແຄວນ້ອຍປ່ຽນທາງຍ່າງອອກຫ່າງຈາກໂຕເມືອງໄປປະມານ 10 ກິໂລແມັດ. ບ່ອນຕັ້ງໂຕເມືອງເກົ່າໃນປັດຈຸບັນແມ່ນ ບໍລິເວນວັດຈຸລາມະນີ ເຊິ່ງເປັນວັດເກົ່າແກ່ຂອງພິດສະນຸໂລກ ແຕ່ເມື່ອປະມານ ຄ.ສ. 1357 ພະມະຫາທຳມະລາຊາທີ 1 (ລິໄທ) ໄດ້ໂຜດ ໃຫ້ຍ້າຍເມືອງສອງແຄວ ມາຕັ້ງຢູ່ ໃນບໍລິເວນໂຕເມືອງໃນປັດຈຸບັນ ແລະຍັງຄົງເອີ້ນກັນຕິດປາກວ່າ ເມືອງສອງແຄວ ເລື້ອຍມາ. ຈັງຫວັດພິດສະນຸໂລກ ຈັງຫວັດໃນປະເທດໄທ
__label__lo ເຮືອນ ແມ່ນສິ່ງກໍສ້າງເຊິ່ງນຳໃຊ້ເປັນບ່ອນພັກອາໄສຂອງຜູ້ຄົນ ໂດຍທົ່ວໄປມີຜະໜັງແລະຫຼັງຄາໄວ້ປ້ອງກັນພື້ນທີ່ພາຍໃນເຮືອນຈາກຄວາມຮ້ອນ ຄວາມເຢັນ ລົມ ຝົນ ແລະສິ່ງອື່ນໆ.​ ນອກຈາກນີ້ ເຮືອນຍັງແມ່ນບ່ອນຢູ່ຂອງສັດອື່ນໆ ເຊິ່ງຄົນໃນເຮືອງບໍ່ຕ້ອງການ ແລະຂອງສັດລ້ຽງ. ມີຜູ້ຄົນຫຼາຍຫຼວງຜູ້ເຮັດວຽກໃນແຕ່ລະມື້ພາຍໃນເຮືອນ ແຕ່ສ່ວນຫຼາຍຈະອອກໄປເຮັດວຽກນອກເຮືອນແລະຄືນເມືອເຮືອນເພື່ອໃຊ້ເປັນບ່ອນນອນຫຼັບພັກຜ່ອນແລະເຮັດກິຈະກຳອື່ນໆ. ເຮືອນ
__label__lo ແວວ ຈົ໊ກມົກ ຫຼື ທຽມໃຈ ວົງຄຳເຫຼົາ ເປັນນ້ອງສາວຂອງນັກສະແດງຕະຫຼົກຊື່ດັງ “ໝ່ຳ ຈົ໊ກມົກ” ເປັນຊາວຈັງຫວັດຍະໂສທອນ ດ້ານຜົນງານການສະແດງຂອງ ແວວ ຈົ໊ກມົກ ມີຊື່ຈິງວ່າ ທຽມໃຈ ວົງຄຳເຫຼົາ ຢ່າງຕາມຮອຍອ້າຍ ໝ່ຳ ຈົ໊ກມົກ ເຂົ້າສູ່ວົງການຈົນກາຍເປັນດາວຕະຫຼົກໃນທີ່ສຸດ ຫຼັງຈາກນັ້ນໄດ້ສ້າງຊື່ສຽງຈາກຜົນງານລະຄອນແລະຮູບເງົາຫຼາຍເລື່ອງ ສ່ວນເລື່ອງທີ່ເດັ່ນໆ ຄື ແຫຍມຍະໂສທອນ ຮັບບົດເປັນ ຄຸນນາຍດອກທໍ້ ປະຫວັດ ແວວ ຈົ໊ກມົກ ເກີດເມື່ອວັນທີ່ 27 ກໍລະກົດ ຄ.ສ. 1967 ທີ່ຈັງຫວັດຍະໂສທອນ ເປັນນ້ອງສາວແທ້ໆ ຂອງຕະຫຼົກຊື່ດັງ ໝ່ຳ ຈົ໊ກມົກ ຜົນງານ ຮູບເງົາ ແຫຍມຍະໂສທອນ ຮັບບົດເປັນ ຄຸນນາຍດອກທໍ້ วงษ์คำเหลา ບຸກຄົນທີ່ເກີດໃນປີ ຄ.ສ. 1967 ບຸກຄົນທີ່ເສຍຊີວິດໃນປີ ຄ.ສ. 2017 ນັກສະແດງໄທ ບຸກຄົນທີ່ເສຍຊີວິດແລ້ວ ນັກສະແດງຕະຫຼົກໄທ ບຸກຄົນຈາກຈັງຫວັດຍະໂສທອນ ບຸກຄົນທີ່ເສຍຊີວິດຈາກພາວະຫົວໃຈລົ້ມແຫຼວ
__label__lo ພະລາຊະວັງ Topkapı (Ottoman ຕວກກີ: طوپقپو سرايى) ແມ່ນພະລາຊະວັງໃນ Istanbul Sarayburnu, ຖືກນໍາໃຊ້ເປັນສູນກາງການປົກຄອງຂອງລັດສໍາລັບ 400 ປີຂອງປະຫວັດສາດ 600 ປີຂອງ Empire Ottoman ແລະບ່ອນທີ່ sultans Ottoman ອາໄສຢູ່. ພະລາຊະວັງ TOpkapıຖືກສ້າງຂຶ້ນໂດຍ Mehmed the Conqueror ໃນປີ 1478, ແລະມັນເປັນສູນກາງການບໍລິຫານຂອງລັດແລະທີ່ຢູ່ອາໄສຢ່າງເປັນທາງການຂອງ sultans Ottoman ສໍາລັບປະມານ 380 ປີຈົນກ່ວາAbdülmecidມີພະລາຊະວັງ Dolmabahçe ສ້າງຂຶ້ນ. ພະລາຊະວັງ, ເຊິ່ງຕັ້ງຢູ່ເທິງພື້ນທີ່ປະມານ 700,000 m² ໃນລະຫວ່າງປີທີ່ຕັ້ງ, ແມ່ນ 80,000 m².
__label__lo ເສັ້ນແວງ (ອັງກິດ: Longitude) ແທນດ້ວຍອັກສອນເກຣັກ λ ເປັນພິກັດທີ່ໃຊ້ບອກຕຳແໜ່ງເທິງໜ້າໂລກ ໂດຍວັດໄປທາງຕາເວັນອອກ ຫຼື ຕາເວັນຕົກ ຈາກເສັ້ນຂະໜານໃນລວງເໜືອໃຕ້ ທີ່ເອີ້ນວ່າ ເສັ້ນໄພຣ໌ເມີຣິດຽນ. ກຳນົດເອົາເສັ້ນທີ່ເນັ່ງແຕ່ຂວັ້ນໂລກເໜືອຫາຂວັ້ນໂລກໃຕ້ ເຊິ່ງເສັ້ນແວງກໍແບ່ງອອກເປັນ 24 ເສັ້ນຕາມເຂດບົ້ວໂມງຂອງໂລກ. ເສັ້ນແວງມີໜ່ວຍອົງສາ ນັບຈາກ 0 ອົງສາທີ່ເສັ້ນໄພຣ໌ເມີຣິດຽນໄປທາງຕາເວັນອອກ +180 ອົງສາ ແລະ ໄປທາງຕາເວັນຕົກ -180 ອົງສາ ໃນປີ ຄ.ສ 1884 ການປະຊຸມເມີຣິດຽນນາໆຊາດ (International Meridian Conference) ຈຶ່ງໄດ້ກຳນົດໃຫ້ເສັ້ນ ເວລາກຣີນນິຊ ເປັນເສັ້ນເວລາ ເປັນເສັ້ນໄພຣ໌ເມີຣິດຽນ ແລະ ເປັນເສັ້ນແວງ 0 ອົງສາ.
__label__lo ປະສຸສັດ () ແມ່ນສັດລ້ຽງຫຼືສັດເສດຖະກິດທີ່ໃຊ້ວຽກ ແລະເປັນອາຫານ. ສັດເສດຖະກິດມີທັງສັດສີ່ຕີນ ແມ່ນ ງົວ ຄວາຍ ມ້າ ແບ້ ແກະ ໝູ ແລະສັດປີກ ແມ່ນ ເປັດ ໄກ່ ຫ່ານ ໄກ່ງວງ ເປັນຕົ້ນ. ສິ່ງທີ່ໄດ້ຈາກປະສຸສັດໄດ້ແກ່ ຊີ້ນ ໄຂ່ ນົມ ໜັງ ແລະຂົນ. ການລ້ຽງສັດນັບວ່າ ແມ່ນອາຊີບດີຂອງກະສິກອນ ສາມາດລ້ຽງເປັນຈຳນວນຫຼາຍເພື່ອໃຊ້ເປັນອາຊີບຫຼັກ ຫຼືລ້ຽງຈຳນວນໜ້ອຍເພື່ອເປັນອາຊີບເສີມ. ນິລຸດຕິສາດ ຄຳວ່າ "ປະສຸສັດ" ປະກອບດ້ວຍ "ປະສຸ" () ແລະ "ສັດ" (). "ປະສຸ" ໝາຍເອົາ ສັດທີ່ມະນຸດນຳມາລ້ຽງເພື່ອໃຊ້ແຮງງານ ສ່ວນ "ສັດ" ໝາຍເອົາ ສິ່ງທີ່ມີຈິດວິນຍານເໜັງຕີງໄປມາໄດ້ ປະສຸສັດ
__label__lo ທິວີ ອາຊເຕກາ () ແມ່ນບໍລິສັດສື່ມວນຊົນເມັກຊິໂກເປັນເຈົ້າຂອງໂດຍກຸ່ມຊາລິນາ. ມັນແມ່ນບໍລິສັດສື່ມວນຊົນທີ່ໃຫຍ່ທີ່ສຸດອັນດັບສອງໃນເມັກຊິໂກຫຼັງຈາກເຕເລວິຊາ. ຊ່ອງໂທລະພາບ Azteca Uno Azteca 7 A Más ADN 40 ສາຍ Az Clic! Az Mundo Az Corazón Az Cinema Azteca Uno -1 hora Azteca Uno -2 horas Romanza+ Africa ອ້າງອີງ ການເຊື່ອມຕໍ່ພາຍນອກ ບໍລິສັດຂອງເມັກຊິໂກ
__label__lo ທ່ານ ເຈເນລາລິດສະໂມ ຟານສິດໂກ ຟຣັງໂກ້ ແມ່ນອາດີດຜູ້ນຳແລະຜູ້ຜະເດັດການແຫ່ງປະເທດແອສະປາຍ ຄອງອຳນາຈຕັ້ງແຕ່ ຄ.ສ. 1936 ຮອດ ຄ.ສ. 1975 ໂດຍທ່ານໃຊ້ລະບອບຟາດຊິດໃນການປົກຄອງ ທ່ານເຂົ້າສູ່ອຳນາດເມື່ອໄດ້ຮັບໄຊຊະນະໃນສົງຄາມກາງເມືອງແອສະປາຍແລະໄດ້ວາງລາກຖານການປົກຄອງລະບອບຜະເດັດການຮອດມື້ສຸດທ້າຍຂອງຊີວິດ ໃນສົງຄາມໂລກຄັ້ງທີ 2 ເຜິ່ນປະກາດວາງໂຕເປັນກາງ ແຕ່ໄດ້ໃຫ້ການສະໜັບສະໜຸນນາຊີເຢັຢລະມັນແລະອິຕາລີຢ່າງລັບໆ ຈົນຮອດ ຄ.ສ. 1945 ທ່ານສາມາດອອກຈາກອິດທິພົນຂອງນາຊີເຢັຍລະມັນໄດ້ຢ່າງສະຫຼາດ ແລະເມື່ອຮອດສົງຄາມເຢັນ ເຜີ່ນໃຫ້ການສະໜັບສະໜຸນຝ່າຍສະຫະລັດອາເມລິກາຢ້ອນເຜິ່ນຕໍ່ຕ້ານລະບອບຄອມມູນິດ ໃນ ຄ.ສ. 1969 ທ່ານປະກາດໃຫ້ຮູ້ໂດຍທັ່ວກັນວ່າ ຫາກທ່ານໄດ້ມໍລະນະກຳແລ້ວຂໍໃຫ້ມີການຮື້ຟື້ນສະຖາບັນກະສັດແອສະປາຍອີກເທື່ອ ໂດຍໃຫ້ມີການປາບດາພິເສກເຈົ້າຊາຍຄວນ ກາໂລດຊຶ່ງແມ່ນພະລາດຊະນັດດາຂອງພະເຈົ້າອັນຟອງໂຊທີ 13ກະສັດອົງສຸດທ້າຍແຫ່ງແອສະປາຍຂິ້ນຄອງລາດສືບຕ່ອໄປ ທ່ານໄດ້ເຖິງແກ່ມໍລະນະກຳເມື່ອ ຄ.ສ. 1975 ອ້າງອິງ ຊາວແອສະປາຍ
__label__lo ທ່າພະບາດ ເປັນຊື່ເມືອງ ແລະ ຊື່ບ້ານແຫ່ງໜື່ງຂອງແຂວງບໍລິຄຳໄຊ ອອກຈາກນະຄອນຫຼວງວຽງຈັນປະມານ 2 ຊົ່ວໂມງ ໂດຍລົດເມ. ເປັນແຫຼ່ງທ່ອງທ່ຽວແຫ່ງໜື່ງທີ່ສວຍງາມ ແລະ ວັດທະນະທຳອັນລຶຊື່ ກ່ຽວກັບພະບາດໂພນສັນ ແລະ ຮອຍພະພຸດທະບາດ ແຕ່ສະໄໝພຸດທະການຍັງຄົງຮູບຊົງໄວ້ໃຫ້ຄົນຮຸ້ນຫຼັງໄດ້ເຄົາລົບບູຊາ.
__label__lo ເສດຖະກິດການເມືອງ (ຄຳເຄົ້າ: ເສຣສຖກິຈກາຣເມືອງ) ແມ່ນ ຄຳສັບເດີມ ທີ່ໝາຍເຖິງ ການສຶກສາ ການຜະລິດ, ການຊື້, ການຂາຍ ແລະ ຄວາມສຳພັນ ຂອງມັນກັບ ກົດໝາຍ, ປະເພນີ ແລະ ລັດຖະບານ. ມັນຖືກ ພັດທະນາຂຶ້ນ ໃນ ສັດຕະວັດ ທີ 18 ເພື່ອສຶກສາ ສະພາບເສດຖະກິດ ຂອງ ລັດໃດໜຶ່ງ.
__label__lo ເຍເນລິ ມາກຸສ ຊາປາໂຣ ໂກລອນ ມິສແກຣນອິນເຕີເນຊັນແນລ 2013 ເປັນຊາວປວຍຣ໌ໂຕຣີໂກ ການປະຕິບັດໜ້າ​ທີ່ຕ່າງປະເທດ – ປະເທດບ້ານເກີດເມືອງນອນ – ປະເທດທີ່ຕັ້ງອົງກອນມິສແກຣນອິນເຕີຣ໌ເນຊັນແນລແລະປະເທດເຈົ້າພາບ ອ້າງອີງ ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ບຸກຄົນທີ່ຍັງມີຊີວິດຢູ່ ບຸກຄົນທີ່ເກີດໃນປີ ຄ.ສ. 1991 ນາງງາມ ຜູ້ຊະນະການປະກວດມິສແກຣນອິນເຕີເນຊັນແນລ ນາງແບບ
__label__lo ນ້ຳຕົກຕາດນີອາກາລາ (ອັງກິດ: Niagara Falls ; ຝະລັ່ງ: les Chutes du Niagara) ແມ່ນນ້ຳຕົກຕາດສ່ຳໃຫຍ່ຫຼາຍຫົນຫຼາຍແຫ່ງປະກອບກັນ. ຕັ້ງຢູ່ເທິງແມ່ນ້ຳນີອາກາລາທາງຕາເວັນອອກຂອງທະວີບອາເມລິກາເໜືອ ເທິງຊາຍແດນຫວ່າງປະເທດການາດາກັບສະຫະລັດອາເມລິກາ. ນ້ຳຕົກຕາດນີອາກາລາປະກອບດ້ວຍນ້ຳຕົກຕາດສາມແຫ່ງຊຶ່ງແຍກແບ່ງອອກຈາກກັນ ແມ່ນ ນ້ຳຕົກຕາດເກີບມ້າ (Horseshoe Falls ລາງເທື່ອກໍເອີ້ນ ນ້ຳຕົກຕາດການາດາ) ສູງ 158 ຟຸດ, ນ້ຳຕົກຕາດອາເມລິກາສູງ 167 ຟຸດ, ແລະນ້ຳຕົກຕາດສ່ຳນ້ອຍກວ່າທີ່ຢູ່ຕິດກັນ ແມ່ນນ້ຳຕົກຕາດ Bridal Veil. ແມ່ນນ້ຳຕົກນີອາກາລາຈະບໍ່ສູງຢ່າງໂດດເດັ່ນປານໃດ ແຕ່ກໍກວ້າງຂວາງກວາງໄກຫຼາຍຫຼວງ. ອ້າງອີງ ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ພູມສາດແຫ່ງນ້ຳຕົກຕາດນີອາກາລາ
__label__lo ວົງ​ການ​ວັດ​ທະ​ນະ​ທໍາ​ຂອງ​ຕົວ​ອັກ​ສອນ​ຈີນ(漢字文化圈)​, ຫຼື​ເອີ້ນ​ວ່າ​ວົງ​ການ​ວັດ​ທະ​ນະ​ທໍາ​ຈີນ​ແລະ​ວົງ​ການ​ວັດ​ທະ​ນະ​ທໍາ​ອາ​ຊີ​ຕາ​ເວັນ​ອອກ​, ຫມາຍ​ເຖິງ​ວົງ​ການ​ວັດ​ທະ​ນະ​ທໍາ​ທີ່​ໄດ້​ຮັບ​ອິດ​ທິ​ພົນ​ຂອງ​ວັດ​ທະ​ນະ​ທໍາ​ຈີນ​ແລະ​ຈີນ​ໃນ​ປະ​ຫວັດ​ສາດ​ແລະ​ການ​ນໍາ​ໃຊ້​ຕົວ​ອັກ​ສອນ​ຈີນ​ຫຼື​ຈີນ​ຄລາ​ສ​ສິກ​ເປັນ​ພາ​ສາ​ຂຽນ​ໃນ​. ອະດີດຫຼືປະຈຸບັນ.
__label__lo ເນີຍແຂງຟ້າແກ່ (, ຫຼື ) ແມ່ນບັນດາເນີຍແຂງທີ່ເຮັດຈາກນົມງົວ ນົມແກະ ຫຼືນົມແບ້ ເຊິ່ງມີການເພາະປູກຂອງຮາ Penicillium ເພື່ອທີ່ຈະໃຫ້ມີຮາເປັນຈຸດໆ ໂດຍມີຮາທີ່ມີສີຟ້າແກ່ ສີຟ້າແກ່ອົມສີຂີ້ເທົ່າ ຫຼືສີຟ້າແກ່ອົມສີຂຽວ ແລະມີກິ່ນອັນມີເອກະລັກ. ເນີຍແຂງຟ້າແກ່ສ່ວນຫຼາຍຈະໝັກໄວ້ໃນທີ່ປັບອຸນຫະພູມໄດ້ ເຊັ່ນໃນອຸໂມງ. ເນີຍແຂງຟ້າແກ່ສາມາດນຳມາກິນເປົ່າໆ ຫຼືສາມາດນຳມາລະລາຍປະສົມກັບອາຫານອື່ນໆ ໄດ້. ເນີຍແຂງຟ້າແກ່
__label__lo ການຜັງເມືອງ ຫຼື ການວາງແຜນຊຸມຊົນເມືອງ (ອັງກິດ: urban planning) ແມ່ນສາດໜຶ່ງ ກ່ຽວຂ້ອງກັບສະຫະສາຂາວິຊາ ເຊັ່ນ ການວາງແຜນ ກົດໝາຍ ສະຖາປັດຕະຍະກຳ ສັງຄົມສາດ ເສດຖະສາດ ສິ່ງແວດລ້ອມ ວິສະວິກຳຈະລາຈອນ ເພື່ອເປັນການກຳໜົດນະໂຍບາຍ ກົດໝາຍ ເກນ ລະບຽບ. ການຈັດວາງຜັງແລະແຜນການໃຊ້ພື້ນທີ່ຂອງເມືອງ ຊຸມຊົນ ໂຄງຂ່າຍການຈະລາຈອນ. ການຜັງເມືອງ
__label__lo ແສນສັກ ເມືອງສຸຣິນ (13 ສິງຫາ 1951-16 ເມສາ 2009) ແມ່ນນັກມວຍຊາວໄທທີ່ເຄີຍເປົນແຊ້ມໂລກຮຸ່ນ 140 ປອນຂອງສະພາມວຍໂລກ (WBC) ມີຊື່ທີ່ແທ້ຈິງວ່າບຸນສົ່ງ ມັິ່ນສີ ເກີດທີ່ອຳເພີເມືອງ ຈັງຫວັດເພົດຊະບູນ ແສນສັກຍັງເປັນເຈົ້າຂອງສະຖິຕິໂລກໂດຍຕີມວຍສາກົນ ແຕ່ພຽງ ສາມເທື່ອກໍ້ໄດ້ເປົນແຊ້ມໂລກ ຊໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ແສນສັກ ເມືອງສຸລິນ ຊາວໄທ ນັກມວຢ
__label__lo ມິສເຕີໂກລໂບ້ວ () ເປັນເວທີການປະກວດຄວາມງາມຊາຍນານາຊາດໃນລະດັບແກຣນສະແລັມ ມີສຳນັກວຽກໃຫຍ່ຕັ້ງຢູ່ໃນ ບາງກອກ, ປະເທດໄທ ໂດຍເລີ່ມຈັດການປະກວດຄັ້ງທໍາອິດເມື່ອປີ ຄ.ສ. 2014 ທີ່ ນະຄອນລາຊະສີມາ, ປະເທດໄທ ຜູ້ທີ່ໄດ້ຮັບຕຳແໜ່ງລ່າສຸດ ຮອງຊະນະເລີດ ລາງວັນພິເສດ ຕົວແທນປະເທດລາວ ສັນຍະລັກສີ ຊະນະເລີດ ຮອງຊະນະເລີດ ເຂົ້າຮອບສຸດທ້າຍ ເພີ່ມເຕີມ ລາຍະການປະກວດຄວາມງາມ ອ້າງອີງ ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ມິສເຕີໂກລໂບ້ວ ແມ່ແບບການປະກວດຄວາມງາມຊາຍ ການປະກວດຄວາມງາມຊາຍ ໂກລໂບ້ວ ບິວຕີ້
__label__lo ຊຸດໂຣບົດ ຫຼື ຊຸດຫຸ່ນຍົນ (ອັງກິດ: powered exoskeleton) ແມ່ນໂຣບົດອັນເຄື່ອນໄຫວໄດ້ເຊິ່ງຄົນສາມາດນຳມານຸ່ງປານເຄື່ອງນຸ່ງ. ຄວາມເປັນມາ ປະເທດສະຫະລັດອາເມລິກາເປັນຜູ້ພັດທະນາຊຸດໂຣບົດອັນນຸ່ງປານເຄື່ອງນຸ່ງເປັນເທື່ອທຳອິດ. ເມື່ອນຸ່ງຈະເຮັດໃຫ້ມີແຮງຫຼາຍຫຼວງຂຶ້ນ. ການພັດທະນາຊູດໂຣບົດໃນຍຸດທຳອິດນັ້ນ ແມ່ນມີເປົ້າໝາຍເພື່ອນຳໄປໃຊ້ໃນການທະຫານ. ແຕ່ຕໍ່ມາກໍໄດ້ພັດທະນາເພື່ອໃຊ້ສຳລັບຄົນພິການແລະຄົນເຖົ້າຜູ້ຍ່າງ ນັ່ງ ຫຼື ນອນບໍ່ຄ່ອຍສະດວກ.​ສຳລັບປະເທດເກົາຫຼີໃຕ້ ໃນປີ ຄ.ສ. 2005 ທີມນັກວິໄຈໄດ້ພັດທະນາຊຸດໂຣບົດເຊິ່ງໜັກພຽງ 3 ກິໂລຂຶ້ນມາ. ອ້າງອີງ กีซอง,โด. วิทยาศาสตร์ฉลาดรู้ เรื่อง หุ่นยนต์. กรุงเทพมหานคร: อมรินทร์คอมมิกส์, 2008. Print. ໂຣບົດທະຫານ
__label__lo ເທືອກເຂົາ ຫິມະໄລ ( Himalaya ); ສັນສະກິດ : ( हिम 'ຫິມະ') ແລະ ( आलय 'ທີ່ຢູ່ອາໄສ, ບ່ອນຢູ່ອາໃສ, ທີ່ຢູ່ອາໃສ'), ແມ່ນ ສາຍພູ ໃນ ພາກໃຕ້ ແລະ ອາຊີຕາເວັນອອກ ແຍກເຂດທົ່ງພຽງຂອງ ອະນຸທະວີບອິນເດຍ ຈາກ ພູພຽງຕິເບດ . ສາຍພູປະກອບມີຍອດພູ ສູງສຸດຂອງໂລກ, ຍອດເຂົາ ເອເວີເຣສຕ໌, ຕັ້ງຢູ່ຊາຍແດນລະຫວ່າງ ເນປານ ແລະ ຈີນ . ພູຫິມະໄລ ລວມມີຫລາຍກວ່າ ຫ້າສິບພູສູງ ສູງກວ່າ 7,200 m (23,600 ຟຸດ), ລວມທັງສິບຈາກສິບຫ້າຍອດພູພູທີ່ສູງ 8,000 ແມັດ . ໂດຍກົງກັນຂ້າມ, ຈຸດສູງສຸດນອກອາຊີ (Aconcagua, ໃນ Andes ) ແມ່ນ 6,961 m (22,838 ຟຸດ).
__label__lo ອານເນລີສ ມາຣີ ແຟຣັງ ຜູ້ຂຽນບັນທຶກຊາວເຢຍລະມັນ-ດັດຊ໌ ທີ່ມີເຊື້ອສາຍຢິວ. ຫນຶ່ງໃນຜູ້ຖືກເຄາະຮ້າຍຊາວຢິວທີ່ຖືກເວົ້າເຖິງກັນຫຼາຍທີ່ສຸດສຳລັບ Holocaust, ນາງໄດ້ຮັບຊື່ສຽງພາຍຫຼັງການພິມປຶ້ມເຜີຍແຜ່ປີ 1947 ຂອງ ປຶ້ມບັນທຶກຂອງເດັກຍິງ (ຕົ້ນສະບັບແມ່ນ in ໂຮນລັງ ; ), ໃນ​ນັ້ນ​ນາງ​ບັນທຶກເປັນໜັງສືກ່ຽວກັບ​ຊີ​ວິດ​ຂອງ​ນາງ​ໃນ​ການ​ຫລົບລີ້ ​ຈາກປີ 1942 ຫາ 1944​, ໃນ​ລະ​ຫວ່າງ​ການ​ຍຶດ ​ຄອງ​ຂອງ​ເຢຍ​ລະ​ມັນໃນປະເດທ​ເນ​ເທີ​ແລນ ​ໃນ ​ສົງ​ຄາມ​ໂລກ​ຄັ້ງ​ທີ​ສອງ ​. ມັນ​ເປັນ​ຫນຶ່ງ​ໃນ​ຫນັງ​ສື​ທີ່​ດີ​ທີ່​ສຸດ​ຂອງ​ໂລກ ​ແລະ ​ໄດ້​ເປັນ​ພື້ນ​ຖານ​ສໍາ​ລັບ​ການ​ສະແດງລະ​ຄອນ​ ແລະ​ ຮູບ​ເງົາ​ຫຼາຍເລື່ອງ​. ບຸກຄົນທີ່ເສຍຊີວິດໃນປີ ພ.ສ. 2488 ບຸກຄົນທີ່ເກີດໃນປີ ພ.ສ. 2472
__label__lo ນະຄອນຫລວງວຽງຈັນແມ່ນນະຄອນຫຼວງແຫ່ງ ສປປ.ລາວ ເປັນເມືອງໃຫຍ່ທີ່ສຸດຂອງ ສາທາລະນະລັດ ປະຊາທິປະໄຕ ປະຊາຊົນລາວ . ວຽງຈັນແບ່ງອອກເປັນ 9 ຕົວເມືອງ ມີເນື້ອທີ່ທັງໝົດປະມານ. 3,920 ກິ​ໂລ​ຕາ​ແມັດ, ຕັ້ງ​ຢູ່ ​ແຄມ​ແມ່​ຂອງ, ໃກ້​ກັບ​ຊາຍ​ແດນ​ໄທ. ວຽງຈັນເຄີຍເປັນເມືອງເອກໃນການປົກຄອງຂອງຝຣັ່ງເສດ ແລະ ຍ້ອນການຂະຫຍາຍຕົວທາງດ້ານເສດຖະກິດໃນສະໄໝມໍ່ໆມານີ້, ປະຈຸບັນຈຶ່ງແມ່ນສູນກາງເສດຖະກິດຂອງລາວ. ເມືອງ​ມີ​ປະ​ຊາ​ກອນ​ຂອງ 948,477 ຄົນ ຈາກການສຳຫລວດສໍາ​ມະ​ໂນ​ຄົວ ​ປີ 2020​. ປະຫວັດ ກຳແພງເມືອງວຽງຈັນ ສະຖານທີ່ສຳຄັນ ພະທາດຫຼວງວຽງຈັນ ປະຕູໄຊ ວັດຊຽງຄວນ ວັດສີສະເກດ ວັດສີເມືອງ ຫໍພະແກ້ວ ຫໍພິພິທະພັນແຫ່ງຊາດ ການເດິນທາງ ສະໜາມບິນ ຢູ່ໃນວຽງຈັນມີສະໜາມບິນສາກົນວັດໄຕ ເຊິ່ງເປັນອີກທາງໜຶ່ງທີ່ຈະເຂົ້າສູ່ວຽງຈັນໄດ້ ເມືອງຫຼວງ ປະເທດລາວ
__label__lo ມະຫາວິທະຍາໄລລາຊະພັດສວນສຸນັນທາ () ; () ແມ່ນມະຫາວິທະຍາໄລຂອງລັດ ເຊິ່ງຕັ້ງຢູ່ໃນພື້ນທີ່ວັງສວນສຸນັນທາ ອັນເຄີຍເປັນເຂດພະລາຊະຖານຂອງພະລາຊະວັງດຸສິດໃນລາຊະການທີ່ 5 ມາກ່ອນ ມະຫາວິທະຍາໄລແຫ່ງນີ້ມີຮາກຖານມາຈາກການສະຖາປະນາ "ໂຮງຮຽນສວນສຸນັນທາວິທະຍາໄລ" ເມື່ອວັນທີ 17 ພຶດສະພາ ພ.ສ. 2480 ເປີດສອນ ປະກາດສະນີຍະບັດປະໂຍກຄູປະຖົມ (ປ.ປ.) ຕໍ່ມາເຈິ່ງຍົກຖານະຂຶ້ນແມ່ນ "ວິທະຍາໄລຄູສວນສຸນັນທາ" ໃນປີ ພ.ສ. 2518 ຕາມພະລາຊະບັນຍັດວິທະຍາໄລຄູ ພ.ສ. 2518 ເປີດສອນຮອດລະດັບປະລິນຍາຕີຫຼັກສູດຄຸສາດບັນດິດ ມະຫາວິທະຍາໄລໃນປະເທດໄທ ມະຫາວິທະຍາໄລລາຊະພັດ
__label__lo ປູໂຕ (puto) ຫຼື ເຂົ້າໜົມປູໂຕ ແມ່ນເຂົ້າໜົມທີ່ເຮັດຈາກແປ້ງເຂົ້າອັນນຳໄປໜຶ້ງ ປູໂຕແມ່ນເຂົ້າໜົມຟິລິປປີນ. ສາມາດກິນແບບເປົ່າ ໆ ຫຼືກັບເນີຍແລະໝາກພ້າວຂູດ ຫຼືອາດນຳໄປຮັບປະທານກັບອາຫານຄາວອື່ນ ໆ ໄດ້ ເຊັ່ນ ດີນູກູອານ (dinuguan). ອ້າງອີງ ອາຫານໝັກດອງ ອາຫານຟິລິປປີນ ອາຫານປະເພດເຂົ້າ
__label__lo ລາຍໄດ້ແຫ່ງຊາດໝາຍເຖິງ ມູນຄ່າລວມ ຂອງ ສິນຄ້າ ແລະ ການບໍລິການ ທີ່ຖືກຜະລິດຂຶ້ນ ຫຼື ສະໜອງໃນ ເສດຖະກິດໃດໜຶ່ງ.ຕົວວັດແທກ ລາຍໄດ້ແຫ່ງຊາດ ທີ່ຖືກນຳໃຊ້ຫຼາຍ ໃນທົ່ວໄປ ລວມ ມີ ຜະລິດຕະພັນລວມແຫ່ງຊາດ (GNP:Gross National Products), ຜະລິດຕະພັນລວມພາຍໃນ (GDP:Gross Domestic Products), ລາຍໄດ້ລວມແຫ່ງຊາດ (GNI:Gross National Income), ຜະລິດຕະພັນສຸດທິແຫ່ງຊາດ (NNP:Net National Products), ລາຍໄດ້ສຸດທິແຫ່ງຊາດ (NNI:Net National Income). ເສດຖະສາດ ປະເທດ
__label__lo ຈິໂອເຈຍ ເມໂລນິ Giorgia Meloni ( Italian pronunciation: [ˈdʒordʒa meˈloːni] ; ເກີດວັນທີ 15 ມັງກອນ 1977) ເປັນນັກການເມືອງຊາວອີຕາລີ ທີ່ດຳລົງຕຳແໜ່ງເປັນ ນາຍົກລັດຖະມົນຕີ ອີຕາລີ ຕັ້ງແຕ່ວັນທີ 22 ຕຸລາ 2022, ເປັນ ຜູ້ຍິງຄົນທຳອິດ ທີ່ດຳລົງຕຳແໜ່ງນີ້. ເປັນ ສະມາຊິກ​ສະພາ ຕ່ຳ​ນັບ​ແຕ່​ປີ 2006, ນາງ​ໄດ້​ນຳພາ​ພັກ​ການ​ເມືອງ Brothers of Italy (FdI) ນັບ​ແຕ່​ປີ 2014, ​ແລະ ​ນາງ​ເຄີຍ​ດຳລົງ​ຕຳ​ແໜ່​ງ​ເປັນ​ປະທານ ​ພັກ​ອະນຸລັກ​ນິຍົມ ​ແລະ ປະຕິ​ຮູບ​ເອີລົບ ນັບ​ແຕ່​ປີ 2020. ບຸກຄົນທີ່ຍັງມີຊີວິດຢູ່ ບຸກຄົນທີ່ເກີດໃນປີ ພ.ສ. 2520
__label__lo ຂົວ​ຂ້າມ​ແມ່ນ້ຳ​ເຊ​ກອງ ຕັ້ງຢູ່ຂ້າງໆກັບຕະຫຼາດໃໝ່, ຂົວແຫ່ງນີ້ຖືກເປີດໃຊ້ມາແຕ່ປີ 2002 ແລະມີຄວາມຍາວ 279 ແມັດ ເປັນຂົວທີ່ສ້າງຂຶ້ນເພື່ອເຊື່ອມຕໍ່ລະຫວ່າງເມືອງເກົ່າແລະເມືອງໃໝ່ຂອງແຂວງອັດຕະປື ເມື່ອຢືນຢູ່ກາງຂວາຈະແນມເຫັນທິວທັດຂອງສອງຝາກຝັ່ງ ແລະ ແມນ້ຳເຊກອງທີ່ໄຫຼຜ່ານຢ່າງສວຍງາມ. ຂົວໃນປະເທດລາວ
__label__lo ບັງກລາເທດ ( ບັງລາເທດ) ຫຼື ຊື່ຢ່າງເປັນທາງການແມ່ນ ສາທາລະນະລັດ ປະຊາຊົນ ບັງກລາເທດ () ເປັນປະເທດໃນອາຊີໃຕ້ ເຊິ່ງຄອບຄອງເນື້ອທີ່ໃນສ່ວນຕາເວັນຕົກຂອງພາກພື້ນເບັງກາລີ ມີປະຊາກອນປະມານ 165 ລ້ານຄົນ ຖືວ່າເປັນປະເທດທີ່ມີປະຊາກອນຫຼາຍເປັນອັນດັບທີແປດຂອງໂລກ ດ້ວຍພື້ນທີ່ 148,460 ຕາລາງກິໂລແມັດ (57,320 ຕາລາງໄມລ໌) ບັງກລາເທດຈຶ່ງເປັນໜຶ່ງໃນປະເທດທີ່ມີຄວາມໜາແໜ້ນປະຊາກອນຫຼາຍທີ່ສຸດໃນໂລກ ມີອານາເຂດຕິດກັບອິນເດຍທາງທິດເໜືອທິດຕາເວັນອອກ ແລະ ຕາເວັນຕົກ ຕິດກັບມຽນມາທາງຕາເວັນອອກສຽງໃຕ້ ແລະ ຕິດອ່າວເບັງກາລີທາງທິດໃຕ້. ເມືອງຫຼວງຂອງປະເທດແມ່ນທາກາເຊິ່ງເປັນສູນກາງທາງການປົກຄອງ, ເສດຖະກິດ ແລະ ວັດທະນະທຳຂອງປະເທດ ໂດຍມີຈິດຕະກອງເປັນເມືອງທີ່ມີຂະໜາດໃຫບ່ເປັນອັນດັບສອງເຊິ່ງເປັນທ່າເຮືອທີ່ແອອັດຫຼາຍທີ່ສຸດໃນອ່າວເບັງກາລີ. ພາສາລັດຖະການແມ່ນພາສາເບັງກາລີເຊິ່ງເປັນໜຶ່ງໃນຕະກຸນພາສາອິນໂດ-ເອີໂຣປຽນ ຄຳວ່າ "ບັງກລາເທດ (Bangladesh)" ໝາຍເຖິງ "ປະເທດແຫ່ງເບັງກາລີ". ອ້າງອີງ ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ລັດຖະບານ Official Site of Bangladesh Investment Development Authority ຂໍ້ມູນທົ່ວໄປ Bangladesh. The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Bangladesh from the BBC News Bangladesh from UCB Libraries GovPubs Key Development Forecasts for Bangladesh from International Futures ລັດ ແລະ ດິນແດນທີ່ກໍ່ຕັ້ງໃນປີ 1971 ອະດີດອານານິຄົມຂອງອັງກິດ
__label__lo ມິສເຕີໂກລໂບ້ວ 2016 () ເປັນການປະກວດມິສເຕີໂກລໂບ້ວຄັ້ງທີ່ 3 ກໍາຫນົດຈັດໃນວັນທີ່ 6 ພຶດສະພາ ຄ.ສ. 2016 ທີ່ຊຽງໃໝ່, ປະເທດໄທ ຜົນການປະກວດ ລໍາດັບ ລາງວັນພິເສດ ຜູ້ເຂົ້າປະກວດ 30 ຜູ້ເຂົ້າປະກວດທີ່ໄດ້ຮັບການຍືນຍັນ: ເພີ່ມເຕີມ ມິສເຕີໂກລໂບ້ວ ອ້າງອີງ ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ມິສເຕີໂກລໂບ້ວ ແມ່ແບບການປະກວດຄວາມງາມຊາຍ ການປະກວດຄວາມງາມຊາຍ ໂກລໂບ້ວ ບິວຕີ້
__label__lo ຢາວັກຊີນປ້ອງກັນໂຄວິດ-19 Johnson & Johnson ແມ່ນຢາວັກຊີນປະເພດວັກຊີນທີ່ໃຊ້ໄວຣັດເປັນພາຫະນະ ຫລື adenovirus viral vector COVID, 19 ພັດທະນາໂດຍ Janssen Parmeceutical, ບໍລິສັດລູກຂອງບໍລິສັດ Johnson &; Johnson (J & J) ແຫ່ງສະຫະລັດອາເມລິກາ.
__label__lo ຄັງ ແມ່ນບໍລິເວນທີ່ມີຫຍ້າເປັນສ່ວນຫຼາຍ. ຄັງມີຢູ່ທົ່ວໆໄປໃນປະເທດລາວ ເຊິ່ງຫຼາຍກວ່າໝູ່ແມ່ນຢູ່: ຜົ້ງສາລີ, ຫຼວງນ້ຳທາ, ອຸດົມໄຊ, ຫົວພັນ, ຫຼວງພະບາງ, ຊຽງຂວາງ ແລະ ຈຳປາສັກ(ພູພຽງບໍລິເວນ). ຄັງເປັນພົມພືດທີ່ເກີດທົດແທນປ່າໄມ້ ທີ່ຖືກຈູດເຜົາຫຼາຍເທື່ອ. ຄັງມີ 3 ປະເພດຄື: ຄັງທີ່ມີຕົ້ນໄມ້ ແລະ ພຸ່ມໄມ້ປະປົນ, ຄັງຫຍ້າສູງເຊິ່ງມີແຕ່ຫຍ້າລ້ວນໆ(ຫຍ້າແຝກ, ຫຍ້າຄາ...) ແລະ ຄັງຫຍ້າຫ້ຽນ ເຊິ່ງມີຫຍ້າ ເກີດເປັນຍ່ອມໆ ແລະ ມັກມີກໍເລົາສັບປົນຢູ່ນຳ.
__label__lo ໂຮງຮຽນພົດພິທະຍະພະຍັດ ຫຼື ໂຮງຮຽນພຣົດພິທະຍະພະຍັດ (ໄທ: โรงเรียนพรตพิทยพยัต, ໂຣງຣຽນພຣົຕພິທຍພຍັຕ, ) ກໍ່ຕັ້ງຂຶ້ນໃນປີ ພ.ສ. 2492 ກໍ່ຕັ້ງໂດ ຜູ້ອຳການຄົນທຳອິດຄື ນາຍຂຽນ ຂຳປັນຍາ ໂຮງຮຽນພົດພິທະຍະພະຍັດເປັນໜຶ່ງໃນ 500 ໂຮງຮຽນທີຢູ່ໃນໂຄງການໂຮງຮຽນມາດຕະຖານສາກົນ ປະຫວັດ ໂຮງຮຽນພົດພິທະຍະພະຍັດກໍ່ຕັ້ງເທິງທີ່ດິນ 1,041 ໄຣ່ຂອງ ຄຸນຍິງລ່ຽມ ບຸນນາກ ບຸນນາກທີ່ໄດ້ມອບທີ່ດິນໃຫ້ກະຊວງສຶກສາທິການ ໂດຍມີວັດຖຸປະສົງໃຫ້ສ້າງສະຖາບັນທາງການສຶກສາຂຶ້ນໃນທ້ອງທີ່ເຂດລາດກະບັງເພື່ອໃຫ້ເຍົາວະຊົນໃນເຂດລາດກະບັງໄດ້ມີການສຶກສາ ກ່ຽວກັບໂຮງຮຽນ ແມ່ນໂຮງຮຽນທີ່ໃຫຍ່ທີ່ສຸດໃນບາງກອກຂົງເຂດການ 137 ເອເຄີ້. ແຫຼ່ງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນ ເວັບໄຊຕ໌ ໂຮງຮຽນພົດພິທະຍະພະຍັດ ໃຈກາງຂອງຊຸມຊົນຂອງໂຮງຮຽນພົດພິທະຍະພະຍັດ ແຜນທີ່ໂຮງຮຽນພົດພິທະຍະພະຍັດ Dek-Wit-2 ອ້າງອີງ ພົດພິທະຍະພະຍັດ ປະເທດໄທ
__label__lo ບ້ານຜາຕັ້ງ: ຕັ້ງຢູ່ຫຼັກກິໂລແມັດທີ 173 ເປັນຫມູ່ບ້ານນ້ອຍໆ ທີ່ງຽບສະຫງົບ ປະຈຸບັນທີ່ບ້ານຜາແດງ ແລະ ບ້ານຜາຕັ້ງ ມີຜູ້ເລີ່ມເຮັດເຮືອນພັກຂະໜາດນ້ອຍຂຶ້ນແລ້ວ ນັກທ່ອງທ່ຽວສາມາດ ເລືອກພັກໄດ້ຫາກບໍ່ມັກຄວາມສັບສົນຂອງເມືອງວັງວຽງ. ຜາຕັ້ງ ທີ່ວັງວຽງມີພູເຂົາຫລາຍໜ່ວຍມີໜ້າຜາອັນສວຍງາມໃຫ້ຊື່ນຊົມເຊັ່ນ: ຜາແດງ, ຜາຮອມ (ຜາຮອມ), ຜາປວກ, ຜານາງຮົ່ວ ແລະ ຜາຕັ້ງ ທີ່ຢູ່ນອກເມືອງອອກໄປປະມານ 20 ກົມ. ຜາຕັ້ງ ມີສາຍນ້ຳຊອງໄຫລເລາະລຽບຜ່ານ ມີບ້ານຜາຕັ້ງ ບ້ານນ້ອຍຕັ້ງອ້ອມແອ້ມຢູ່ ຊຶ່ງຜາແຫ່ງນີ້ຕາມຕຳນານເລົ່າວ່າ ທ້າວສີທົນ (ມະໂນລາ) ໃຊ້ງ້າວຟັນພູເຂົາເກີດເປັນຜາຕັ້ງຂຶ້ນມາ ດັ່ງນັ້ນຊາວບ້ານຈຶ່ງຖືວ່າເປັນຜາສັກສິດ ຫ້າມຫາປາບໍລິເວນນັ້ນ
__label__lo ສຸພາບບຸລຸດຈຸທາເທບ () ແມ່ນລະຄອນຊຸດຂອງໄທ ສ້າງຂຶ້ນໃນໂອກາດຄົບຮອບ 45 ປີ ຂອງໂທລະພາບຊ່ອງ 3 ແບ່ງອອກເປັນ 5 ເຮື່ອງຍ່ອຍ ຄຸນຊາຍທະຣາທອນ ຄຸນຊານທະຣາທອນ () ແມ່ນລະຄອນເຮື່ອງທຳອິດ ອອກສາຍເມື່ອ 15 ມີນາ – 5 ເມສາ ຄ.ສ. 2013 ຈຳນວນ 10 ຕອນ ຄຸນຊາຍປໍວອນຣຸດ ຄຸນຊາຍປໍວອນຣຸດ () ແມ່ນລະຄອນເຮື່ອງທີສອງ ອອກສາຍເມື່ອ 5 ເມສາ – 3 ພຶດສະພາ ຄ.ສ. 2013 ຈຳນວນ 13 ຕອນ ຄຸນຊາຍພຸດທິພັດ ຄຸນຊາຍພຸດທິພັດ () ແມ່ນລະຄອນເຮື່ອງທີສາມ ອອກສາຍເມື່ອ 3 – 24 ພຶດສະພາ ຄ.ສ. 2013 ຈຳນວນ 10 ຕອນ ຄຸນຊາຍຣັດຊານົນ ຄຸນຊາຍຣັດຊານົນ () ແມ່ນລະຄອນເຮື່ອງທີສີ່ ອອກສາຍເມື່ອ 24 ພຶດສະພາ – 15 ມິຖຸນາ ຄ.ສ. 2013 ຈຳນວນ 11 ຕອນ ຄຸນຊາຍຣົນນະພີ ຄຸນຊາຍຣົນນະພີ () ແມ່ນລະຄອນເຮື່ອງທີຫ້າ ອອກສາຍເມື່ອ 15 ມິຖຸນາ – 7 ກໍລະກົດ ຄ.ສ. 2013 ຈຳນວນ 11 ຕອນ ນັກສະແດງ
__label__lo ສູນພັດທະນາທັກສະເດັກ ແມ່ນສູນໜຶ່ງທີ່ສ້າງຕັ້ງຂື້ນມາເພື່ອເປັນການ ເຝິກທັກສະຂອງເດັກຕາມແຕ່ລະໄວອາຍຸ ເພື່ອເປັນການສ້າງໃຫ້ເດັກມີທັກສະທີ່ດີ. ສູນພັດທະນາທັກສະເດັກຕັ້ງຢູ່ ບ້ານໂພນແກ້ວ ເມືອງນາຊາຍທອງ ນະຄອນຫລວງວຽງຈັນ ໂທ: 020 2017880
__label__lo ຟົວກາ (, [fwɑ gʁɑ] ແປວ່າ "ຕັບທີ່ມີໄຂມັນສູງ") ແມ່ນຕັບຫ່ານຫຼືເປັດທີ່ຂຸນໃຫ້ຕຸ້ຍເປັນພິເສດ. ຟົວກາໄດ້ຊື່ວ່າເປັນອາຫານຝຣັ່ງທີ່ດີທີ່ສຸດຄືກັນກັບທັບເຟິນ. ມີລັກສະນະນຸ່ມມັນແລະມີລົດຊາດທີ່ແຕກຕ່າງຈາກຕັບຂອງເປັດຫຼືຫ່ານທຳມະດາ. ອາຫານຝຣັ່ງ
__label__lo ຈຶຣະ ດ່ານບະວອນເກີຍດ ເປນນັກສະແດງຊາວໄທ ผลงาน ผลงานเพลง อัลบั้ม C-Quint อัลบั้ม Hybrid อัลบั้ม C-Quint Cq รายการโทรทัศน์ ม.แก๊งค์ (3 มกราคม 2553 - 2555) ละครโทรทัศน์ทั้งหมดด้านล่างนี้ออกอากาศทางสถานีโทรทัศน์ช่อง 8 พิธีกร '''C-Quint 4D ช่อง YAAK TV คอนเสิร์ต C-QUINT Dance Attack Concert The Idol Battle Concert ນັກຮ້ອງໄທ ນັກສະແດງໄທ ບຸກຄົນທີ່ຍັງມີຊີວິດຢູ່ ພິທີກອນໄທ ສິລະປິນສັງກັດອາຣ໌ເອສ ບຸກຄົນຈາກບາງກອກ ບຸກຄົນທີ່ເກີດໃນປີ ຄ.ສ. 1985
__label__lo ພຣະອຸໂປສົດສ້າງຂຶ້ນໃນປີ ຄ.ສ 1533 ໃນສະໄໝພຣະເຈົ້າໂພທິສະລາດ ຕໍ່ມາບູລະນະອີກຫລາຍເທື່ອ ຈົນເປັນດັ່ງທີ່ເຫັນໃນປະຈຸບັນ ມີລັກສະນະສິລະປະແບບຫລວງພະບາງທົ່ວໄປ ດ້ານຂ້າງມີພະທາດອົງໃຫຍ່ຮູບສີ່ຫລ່ຽມຫຍໍ້ມຸມ ມີຫໍອູບມຸງຢູ່ບໍ່ໄກ ທີ່ຝາດ້ານນອກມີຮູບປັ້ນສັດ ເຮັດຈາກດິນເຜົາສີລ້ອມຮອບ. ວັດ
__label__lo ທຸງຊາດໄທ () ຫຼືເອີ້ນອີກຢ່າງໜຶ່ງວ່າ ທຸງໄຕລົງ () ແມ່ນທຸງຊາດຂອງລາຊະອານາຈັກໄທ. ມີລັກສະນະເປັນທຸງສີ່ຫຼ່ຽມຜືນຜ້າ ໃຊ້ສີຫຼັກໃນທຸງ 3 ສີ ແມ່ນ ສີແດງ ຂາວ ແລະຟ້າແກ່. ພາຍໃນແບ່ງເປັນແຖບ 5 ແຖບ ແຖບໃນສຸດສີຟ້າແກ່ ຖັດມາດ້ານນອກທັງດ້ານເທິງແລະກ້ອງແມ່ນສີຂາວແລະສີແດງຕາມລຳດັບ ແຖບສີຟ້າແກ່ມີສ່ຳໃຫຍ່ກວ່າແຖບສີອື່ນເປັນ 2 ເທົ່າ. ຄວາມໝາຍສຳຄັນຂອງທຸງໄຕລົງນັ້ນໝາຍເຖິງສະຖາບັນຫຼັກທັງສາມຂອງປະເທດໄທ ແມ່ນ ຊາດ (ສີແດງ) ສາສະໜາ (ສີຂາວ) ແລະພະມະຫາກະສັດ (ສີຟ້າແກ່). ສີທັງສາມນີ້ເອງແມ່ນທີ່ມາຂອງການເອີ້ນຊື່ທຸງນີ້ວ່າທຸງໄຕລົງ (ໄຕ (ໄຕຣ) = ສາມ, ລົງ (ຣົງຄ໌) = ສີ). ພະບາດສົມເດັດພະມົງກຸດເກົ້າເຈົ້າຢູ່ຫົວ ຊົງພະກະລຸນາໂປດເກົ້າຯ ໃຫ້ໃຊ້ທຸງນີ້ເປັນທຸງຊາດໄທ (ຂະນະນັ້ນຍັງເອີ້ນຊື່ປະເທດວ່າສະຫຍາມ) ເມື່ອຊ່ວງປາຍປີ ຄ.ສ. 1917 ເພື່ອດັດແກ້ບັນຫາການຊັກທຸງຊ້າງເຜືອກ (ອັນໃຊ້ເປັນທຸງຊາດມາຕັ້ງແຕ່ລັດຊະກາຍທີ 4) ກັບດ້ານ ແລະເພື່ອເປັນອະນຸສອນໃນການເຂົ້າຮ່ວມສົງຄາມໂລກເທື່ອທີ 1 ກັບຝ່າຍສຳພັນທະມິດ. ສັນຍະລັກຂອງປະເທດໄທ ທຸງຊາດປະເທດໃນທະວີບອາຊີ ທຸງໃນປະເທດໄທ
__label__lo ເວັບບຣາວເຊີ (), ບຣາວເຊີ ຫຼື ໂປຣແກຣມທ່ອງເວັບ ຄືໂປຣແກຣມຄອມພິວເຕີ ທີ່ຜູ້ໃຊ້ສາມາດເບິ່ງຂໍ້ມູນ ແລະ ໂຕ້ຕອບກັບຂໍ້ມູນທີ່ຈັດເກັບໃນເວັບທີ່ສ້າງດ້ວຍພາສາສະເພາະເຊັ່ນ ເອັສທີເອັມແອລ ທີ່ຈັດເກັບໄວ້ທີ່ເວັບເຊີວິສ ຫຼື ເວັບເຊີບເວີ ຫຼື ລະບົບສາງຂໍ້ມູນອື່ນໆ ໂດຍໂປຣແກຣມຄົ້ນຫາເບິ່ງເວັບຄ້າຍຄືເຄື່ອງມືຕິດຕໍ່ສື່ສານກັບເຄືອຂ່າຍຄອມພິວເຕີຂະໜາດໃຫຍ່ທີ່ເອີ້ນວ່າ ເວີລໄວດ໌ເວັບ ເວັບບຣາວເຊີທໍາອິດຂອງໂລກຊື່ ເວີລໄວດ໌ເວັບ ຂະນະດຽວກັນເວັບບຣາວເຊີທີ່ນິຍົມຫຼາຍທີ່ສຸດໃນປັດຈຸບັນ (ພະຈິກ 2022) ຄື ກູເກິລ ໂຄຣມ ຮອງລົງມາແມ່ນໄມໂຄຣຊອບ ເອດຈ໌ ແລະ ຊາຟາລີ ຕາມລຳດັບ ປະຫວັດ ທິມ ເບີເນີຣ໌ສ-ລີ ຈາກສູນວິໄຈເຊີຣ໌ນ ໄດ້ຄິດຄົ້ນລະບົບໄຮເບີເທັກສ໌ ໂປຣແກຣມຄົ້ນຫາເບິ່ງເວັບຕົວທຳອິດມີຊື່ວ່າ ເວີລວາຍດ໌ເວັບ ແຕ່ເວັບໄດ້ຮັບຄວາມນິຍົມຢ່າງຈິງຈັງເມື່ອ ສູນວິໄຈເອັນຊີເອສເອ (NCSA) ຂອງມະຫາວິທະຍາໄລ ອິລລິນອຍສ໌ ເອີຣ໌ແບນາ-ແຊມເປນ ສະຫະລັດອາເມຣິກາ ໄດ້ຄິດຄົ້ນ ໂມເສກ (MOSAIC) ເຊິ່ງເປັນໂປຣແກຣມຄົ້ນຫາເບິ່ງເວັບກຣາຟິກ ຫຼັງຈາກນັ້ນທີມງານທີ່ເຮັດໂມເສກກໍໄດ້ອອກໄປເປີດບໍລິສັດເນັດສະເຄບ ມາດຕະຖານ ອ້າງອີງ ອິນເຕີເນັດ ຄອມພິວເຕີ ຊອບແວ ເວັບບຣາວເຊີ
__label__lo ລາວຮຽນພາສາອັງກິດ ແຕ່ລາວກໍ່ຮຽນພາສາເຍຍລະມັນດ້ວຽ
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍໄປໂຮງຮຽນ
__label__lo ດຽວນີ້ເຈົ້າຢູ່ໃສ?
__label__lo ນັກຮຽນຜູ້ນັ້ນບໍ່ແມ່ນນ້ອງຊາຍຂ້ອຍ.
__label__lo ເຈົ້າຢາກກິນອັນໃດ?
__label__lo ປູ່ຂ້ອຍບໍ່ແມ່ນຕຳຫຼວດ.
__label__lo ລຸງຂ້ອຍເປັນພະນັກງານລັດ.
__label__lo ບາງຄັ້ງຂ້ອຍກໍ່ໃສ່ເກືອໜ້ອຍໜຶ່ງ
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍມີແມວສອງໂຕ
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍບໍ່ຢາກກິນອັນນັ້ນ.
__label__lo ຂໍໂທດ ຂ້ອຍຮູ້ສຶກເປັນໄຂ້
__label__lo ລາວບໍ່ແມ່ນຄົນຈີນ.
__label__lo ພໍ່ໝູ່ຂ້ອຍໄປໂຮງຮຽນມື້ນີ້.
__label__lo ລາວບໍ່ກິນໝາກໄມ້.
__label__lo ແມ່ຂ້ອຍບໍ່ມັກກາເຟນີ້.
__label__lo ອັນນີ້ແມ່ນຫຍັງ?
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍກິນເຂົ້າຢູ່ເຮືອນແລ້ວຂ້ອຍຮຽນພາສາລາວ.
__label__lo ຕອນທໍາອິດຂ້ອຍບໍ່ມັກເຂົາ, ແຕ່ດຽວນີ້ຂ້ອຍມັກ
__label__lo ລາວເຄຍຊີນກັບການເຮັດວຽກຢູ່ໃນຫ້ອງການ
__label__lo ອາສາສະໝັກຜູ້ນັ້ນບໍ່ໄດ້ມາຈາກຝຣັ່ງ.
__label__lo ເຈົ້າເມື່ອຍບໍ່?
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍຮູ້ວ່ານີ້ສໍາຄັນສໍາລັບທ່ານ
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍຮັກແອບເປີ້ນ
__label__lo ຜົວລາວບໍ່ແມ່ນພະນັກງານບໍລິສັດ.
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍສອນຢູ່ໂຮງຮຽນມັດທະຍົມຕອນປາຍ.
__label__lo ດີໃຈທີ່ຮູ້ກັບເຈົ້າ.
__label__lo ອັນນີ້ບໍ່ແມ່ນມີດຂອງເຈົ້າ
__label__lo ເອື້ອຍຂ້ອຍບໍ່ເຮັດວຽກ.
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍຢາກກິນ
__label__lo ຄົນນັ້ນບໍ່ແມ່ນພໍ່ຂ້ອຍ.
__label__lo ລາວບໍ່ແມ່ນອາຈານສອນພາສາລາວຂ້ອຍ.
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍບໍ່ຢາກຊື້ໝາກຖຸລຽນນັ້ນ.
__label__lo ຍິນດີທີ່ໄດ້ຮູ້ຈັກ.
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍເມົາລົດ.
__label__lo ການປິ່ນປົວບໍ່ໄດ້ຜົນ
__label__lo ລາວບໍ່ແມ່ນຜູ້ຊ່ຽວຊານ.
__label__lo ມະຫາວິທະຍາໄລຢູ່ໃສ?
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍຮັກເຈົ້າ.
__label__lo ແມ່ຂ້ອຍບໍ່ມັກແມ່ຄ້າຜູ້ນັ້ນ.
__label__lo ອັນນີ້ແມ່ນໝາກໄມ້ຫຍັງ?
__label__lo ພວກເຂົາເປັນນັກສຶກສາມະຫາວິທະຍາໄລຢູ່ວຽງຈັນ.
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍຍັງຕ້ອງເວົ້າກັບທ່ານ
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍເປັນອາຈານສອນພາສາອັງກິດ.
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍຊື້ປຶ້ມຫົວນີ້ຢູ່ຮ້ານຂາຍປຶ້ມນັ້ນ.
__label__lo ທອມປະຕິເສດທີ່ຈະຍອມແພ້
__label__lo ເມຍລາວໄປຕະຫຼາດ.
__label__lo ມື້ນີ້ວັນທີເທົ່າໃດ ?
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍຊິອ້ວນແບບນີ້.
__label__lo ນັ້ນບໍ່ແມ່ນໂຮງຮຽນຂ້ອຍ.
__label__lo ຜູ້ນີ້ບໍ່ແມ່ນອ້າຍຂ້ອຍ.
__label__lo ເຈົ້າກິນຊີ້ນບໍ?
__label__lo ຜູ້ນັ້ນບໍ່ແມ່ນພໍ່ຂ້ອຍ.
__label__lo ອັນນັ້ນບໍ່ແມ່ນຕຳໝາກຫຸ່ງ.
__label__lo ນີ້ແມ່ນໝາກໄມ້ບໍ?
__label__lo ຢ່າກັດນິ້ວມືເຈົ້າ
__label__lo ລາກ່ອນ!
__label__lo ສະບາຍດີ!
__label__lo ເຈົ້າຮຽນພາສາອັງກິດທຸກໆມື້ບໍ?
__label__lo ຖ້າຈິງ ທ່ານຈະເຮັດຫຍັງ?
__label__lo ຂອບໃຈ!
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍຮຽນພາສາລາວທຸກໆມື້.
__label__lo ຊ່ວຍແດ່່ !
__label__lo ມື້ນີ້ຂ້ອຍຊິບໍ່ຊື້ຫມາກໄມ້ຢູ່ຕະຫຼາດ.
__label__lo ກະຣຸນາຮີບຮ້ອນແດ່
__label__lo ອາຈານຊື່ຫຍັງ?
__label__lo ໂຮງແຮມນີ້ແພງ.
__label__lo ລາວເປັນຊາວນາ.
__label__lo ສະບາຍດີ
__label__lo ສະບາຍດີຕອນເຊົ້າ!
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍຊິບໍ່ຊື້ໝາກໄມ້ຢູ່ຕະຫຼາດມື້ນີ້.
__label__lo ເຈົ້າຊິມາຍີ່ປຸ່ນບໍ?
__label__lo ທອມຕັ້ງຊື່ໝາລາວວ່າຄຸກກີ້
__label__lo ເຮົາກໍາລັງເຮັດວຽກສໍາລັບທ່ານ
__label__lo ເຈົ້າຊື່ຫຍັງ?
__label__lo ມື້ນີ້ເຈົ້າຊິໄປໃສ?
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍຄິດວ່າ ຂ້ອຍເສັຍຂໍກະແຈ
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍໄປໂຮງຮຽນເພື່ອສອນພາສາອັງກິດ.
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍຢາກກີນອັນນີ້, ແຕ່ຂ້ອຍຊິບໍ່ຊື້ມັນ.
__label__lo ມື້ນີ້ນັກຮຽນຮຽນຢູ່ເຮືອນ.
__label__lo ພໍ່ເຖົ້າພວກຂ້ອຍບໍ່ມັກກາເຟ.
__label__lo ທອມຮູ້ວ່າອັນນີ້ມັນຕ້ອງຍາກ
__label__lo ລາວຮຽນພາສາອັງກິດຢູ່ໂຮງຮຽນ.
__label__lo ພາສາຫວຽດນາມບໍ່ແມ່ນພາສາງ່າຍປານໃດ.
__label__lo ມື້ເຊົ້ານີ້ຂ້ອຍຊິໄປໂຮງຮຽນ.
__label__lo ໝູ່ຂ້ອຍຍັງເປັນທະຫານ.
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍຮຽນພາສາລາວຢູ່ເຮືອນ.
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍໄປຊື້ເຄື່ອງ.
__label__lo ໝາກມ່ວງເຈົ້າແມ່ນໜ່ວຍໃດ?
__label__lo ມັນແມ່ນການສຸກເສີນ
__label__lo ບໍ່ເຂົ້າໃຈ.
__label__lo ພວກເຮົາຈະບໍ່ຮຽນພາສາອັງກິດນຳກັນມື້ແລງນີ້.
__label__lo ຂ້ອຍໄປສອນພາສາອັງກິດຢູ່ໂຮງຮຽນ.
__label__lo ລາວມາຈາກເມືອງໄທ.
__label__lo ເຮືອນເຈົ້າຢູ່ໃສ?
__label__lo ພວກເຮົາໄປຕະຫຼາດນຳກັນ.
__label__lo ມະນຸດທຸກຄົນເກີດມາມີກຽດສັກສີ, ສິດທິ, ເສຣີພາບແລະຄວາມສເມີພາບເທົ່າທຽມກັນ. ທຸກໆຄົນມີເຫດຜົນແລະຄວາມຄິດຄວາມເຫັນສ່ວນຕົວຂອງໃຜຂອງມັນ, ແຕ່ວ່າມະນຸດທຸກໆຄົນຄວນປະພຶດຕໍ່ກັນຄືກັນກັບເປັນອ້າຍນ້ອງກັນ.
__label__lo ຕັ້ງແຕ່ມີອາຍຸລຸ້ນບ່າວສາວຂື້ນໄປຜູ້ຊາຍ ແລະ ຜູ້ຍິງໂດຍບໍ່ຈຳກັດສັນຊາດ ເຊື້ອຊາດ ຫຼື ສາສະໜາ ມີສິດທີ່ຈະສົມລົດ(ແຕ່ງດອງເອົາກັນເປັນຜົວເມຍ) ແລະ ສ້າງຄອບຄົວຄູ່ສົມລົດມີສິດສະເໝີກັນໃນເມື່ອວິວາຫະມົງຄົນ ໃນລະຫວ່າງຢູ່ກິນດ້ວຍກັນຖານຜົວເມຍ ແລະ ໃນຂະນະທີ່ມີການເລີກວິວາຫະມົງຄົນ.
__label__lo ດ້ວຍເຫດວ່າ: ລັດສະມາຊິກຕ່າງໆໄດ້ໃຫ້ຄວາມໝັ້ນສັນຍາວ່າຈະຮ່ວມມືກັບອົງການສະຫະປະຊາຊາດເພື່ອຈັດດຳເນີນການໃຫ້ການນັບຖືສິດທັງຫຼາຍຂອງມະນຸດ ແລະ ສິດເສລີພາບອັນສຳຄັນທັງມວນໄດ້ເປັນໄປທົ່ວໂລກຢ່າງປະຈັກ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນສະເໝີກັນຕໍ່ໜ້າກົດໝາຍ ແລະ ມີສິດທີ່ຈະໄດ້ຮັບຄວາມຄຸ້ມຄອງຂອງກົດໝາຍເທົ່າທຽມກັນໂດຍບໍ່ມີການແຕກຕ່າງທຸກຄົນມີສິດທີ່ຈະໄດ້ຮັບຄວາມຄຸ້ມຄອງເທົ່າທຽມກັນຕໍ່ການກະທຳໃດໆທີ່ຖືກບຸກຄົນແຕກຕ່າງກັນອັນອາດເປັນການລະເມີດໃບປະກາດສະບັບນີ້ ແລະ ຕໍ່ການທ້າທາຍໃດໆທີ່ຈະຖືໃຫ້ແຕກຕ່າງກັນດັ່ງນີ້:
__label__lo ປະກາດສາກົນກ່ຽວກັບສິດຂອງມະນຸດສະບັບນີ້ເປັນອຸດົມຂະຕິຮ່ວມກັນທີ່ຈະໃຫ້ຊົນຊາດ ແລະ ປະເທດຊາດທຸກໆຊາດບັນລຸເຖິງ ເພື່ອຈະໃຫ້ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນ ແລະ ອົງການສັງຄົມທຸກອົງການ ຊື່ງຖືເອົາປະກາດນີ້ເປັນນິໃສປະຈຳໃຈສະເໝີນັ້ນພະຍາຍາມຈັດການໃຫ້ມີຜູ້ນັບຖືສິດ ແລະ ເສລີພາບເຫຼົ່ານີ້ໃຫ້ກວ້າງຂວາງອອກໄປໂດຍການສຶກສາ ແລະ ການອົບຮົມ ແລະ ຈັດການໃຫ້ມີຜູ້ຮັບຮູ້ ແລະ ປະຕິບັດສິດ ແລະ ເສລີພາບນີ້ທົ່ວໄປຢ່າງປະຈັກໂດຍໃຊ້ລະບຽບຕາມຂັ້ນຂອງຊາດໃຫ້ໄດ້ຜົນເປັນລຳດັບຂື້ນໄປ; ການນັບຖືສິດ ແລະ ເສລີພາບນີ້ໃຫ້ດຳເນີນໄປໃນທ່າມກາງຊາວຊົນພົນລະເມືອງຂອງບັນດາລັດສະມາຊິກນັ້ນເອງພ້ອມກັບທັງຊາວຊົນພົນລະເມືອງຂອງບັນດາດິນແດນທີ່ຢູ່ໃນອຳນາດແຫ່ງກົດໝາຍຂອງລັດເຫຼົ່ານັ້ນດ້ວຍ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນທີ່ຈະມີມາດຕະຖານການຄອງຊີບພຽງພໍເພື່ອສຸຂະພາບ ແລະ ຄວາມສະບາຍຂອງຕົນ ແລະ ຄອບຄົວຂອງຕົນເປັນຕົ້ນວ່າສຳລັບອາຫານການກິນເຄື່ອງນຸ່ງຮົ່ມທີ່ພັກອາໃສ ການຮັກສາຕົວຈາກແພດພ້ອມທັງການກ່ຽວແກ່ສັງຄົມທີ່ຈຳເປັນນັ້ນດ້ວຍ;ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນມີສິດທີ່ຈະຮັບການປອດໄພໃນເມື່ອຂາດທຳງານໃນເມື່ອມີຄວາມເຈັບເປັນຖືກພິການ ເປັນໝ້າຍເຖົ້າແກ່ສະລາ ຫຼື ຢູ່ໃນສະຖານອື່ນໆເຊັ່ນ:ຂາດພິທີຫາລ້ຽງຊີບອັນເນື່ອງມາຈາກເຫດການທີ່ເກີດຂື້ນຢ່າງບໍ່ເຈດຕະນານັ້ນ.
__label__lo ມາດາຜູ້ຄອດບຸດ ແລະ ເດັກທີ່ເກີດໃໝ່ມີສິດທີ່ຈະໄດ້ຮັບການຊົດຊ່ອຍ ແລະ ຄວາມຊ່ວຍເຫຼືອໂດຍສະເພາະເດັກນ້ອຍທຸກຄົນທີ່ເກີດມາກາງວິວາຫະມົງຄົນ ຫຼື ນອກວິວາຫະມົງຄົນມີສິດທີ່ຈະໄດ້ຮັບຄວາມຄຸ້ມຄອງຈາກສັງຄົມເຊັ່ນດຽວກັນ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນແຕ່ລະຄົນມີສິດເສລີພາບຢ່າງເຕັມທີ່ ທີ່ຈະໄຫ້ສານອິດສະຫຼະ ແລະ ທ່ຽງທຳຟັງຄວາມກ່າວຫາຂອງຕົນຢ່າງຍຸດຕິທຳ ແລະ ເປີດເຜີຍສານນັ້ນຈະພິຈາລະນາຕົກລົງຕາມສິດ ແລະ ໜ້າທີ່ຂອງບຸກຄົນ ຫຼື ຕາມຄຳກ່າວຫາໃສ່ບຸກຄົນຜູ້ນັ້ນຢ່າງມີເຫດຜົນພຽງພໍຢູ້ໃນພະແນກອາຍາ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນມີສິດເສລີພາບໃນການອອກ ແລະ ສະແດງຄວາມຄິດຄວາມເຫັນ ດັ່ງນັ້ນຈື່ງເປັນອັນວ່າ: ກ່ຽວແກ່ສິດທີ່ບໍ່ຕ້ອງວິຕົກໃນຄວາມຄິດຄວາມເຫັນຂອງຕົນ ແລະ ສິດທີ່ຈະສືບຫາຮັບແຜ່ພາບຂ່າວ ແລະ ຄວາມຄິດໂດຍວິທີໃດກໍ່ຕາມ ແລະ ໂດຍບໍ່ຈຳກັດເຂດແດນຂອງປະເທດ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນມີສິດທີ່ຈະພັກຜ່ອນຢ່ອນໃຈ (ມີເວລາຫວ່າງ) ແລະ ເປັນຕົ້ນວ່າໄລຍະເວລາທຳນັ້ນຈະໄດ້ຖືກກະໃຫ້ມີກຳນົດໄວ້ຕາມສົມຄວນສ່ວນຄ່າຈ້າງລາຍວັນນັ້ນກໍ່ຈະໄດ້ຄິດໃຫ້ລຳສັບເວລາພັກຜ່ອນຕາມກຳນົດດ້ວຍ.
__label__lo ການອົບຮົມສຶກສານັ້ນຕ້ອງໄດ້ມຸ້ງໄປຫາຄວາມເບີກບານອັນເຕັມທີ່ຂອງບຸກຄະລິກແຫ່ງມະນຸດ ແລະ ມຸ້ງເຖິງຄວາມນັບຖືສິດຂອງມະນຸດ. 'ແລະ ເສລີພາບສ່ວນສຳຄັນນັ້ນໃຫ້ມາກຍີ່ງຂື້ນການອົບຮົມສຶກສາຕ້ອງສະໜັບສະໜູນຄວາມເຂົ້າໃຈຄວາມຜ່ອນຜັນ ແລະ ມິດຕະພາບລະຫວ່າງປະເທດຊາດທຸກປະເທດ ແລະ ໝູ່ກຸ່ມເຊື້ອຊາດ ຫຼື ສາສະໜາທຸກເຫຼົ່າພ້ອມດ້ວຍຂະຫຍາຍການດຳເນີນຂອງສະຫະປາຊາຊາດເພື່ອຮັກສາໄວ້ຊື່ສັນຕິພາບ.'
__label__lo ດ້ວຍເຫດວ່າ: ການຮັບຮູ້ກຽດຕິສັກອັນມີປະຈຳຢູ່ຕົວບຸກຄົນໃນວົງສະກຸນຂອງມະນຸດທຸກໆຄົນ ແລະ ການຮັບຮູ້ສິດສະເໝີພາບ ແລະ ສະເຖຍລະພາບຂອງບຸກຄົນເຫຼົ່ານັ້ນ ປະກອບເປັນຮາກຖານຂອງສິດເສລີພາບ ຍຸດຕິທຳ ແລະ ສັນຕິພາບຂອງໂລກ.
__label__lo ຜູ້ໃດຜູ້ໜື່ງຈະບໍ່ຖືກໂທດເລີຍໃນການກະທຳ ຫຼື ການຫຼົງລືມຖ້າຫາກວ່າໃນຄະນະທີ່ທຳນັ້ນເຫັນວ່າບໍ່ຜິດຕໍ່ກົດໝາຍຂອງຊາດ ຫຼື ລະຫວ່າງຊາດໃນທຳນອງດຽວກັນ ບໍ່ຄວນຈະປັບໃໝໃສ່ໂທດບຸກຄົນຜູ້ນັ້ນໃຫ້ໜັກກວ່າໂທດທີ່ໃຊ້ປະຕິບັດໃນຄະນະທີ່ກະທຳຄວາມຜິດນັ້ນ.
__label__lo ຂໍ້ໃດຂໍ້ໜື່ງໃນປະກາດສະບັບນີ້ບໍ່ໃຫ້ເອົາຕິດຄວາມເຂົ້າໄປໃນທາງອັນກ່ຽວແກ່ສິດໃດສິດໜື່ງສະລັບລັດໃດລັດໜື່ງ ໝູ່ຄະນະໃດຄະນະໜື່ງ ຫຼື ບຸກຄົນໃດບຸກຄົນໜື່ງທີ່ຈະດຳເນີນຫຼື ປະຕິບັດການອັນມຸ້ງທຳລາຍສິດ ແລະ ເສລີພາບທັງມວນຢູ່ໃນປະກາດສະບັບນີ້.
__label__lo ດ້ວຍເຫດວ່າ: ໃນກົດໝາຍໂລກນັ້ນປະຊາຊົນແຫ່ງສະຫະປະຊາຊາດໄດ້ປະກາດຢືນຢັນຄວາມເຊື່ອຖືຂອງຕົນອີກໃນສິດສຳຄັນຂອງມະນຸດ ໃນກຽດຕິສັກ ແລະ ຄຸນຄ່າຂອງບຸກຄົນໃນຄວາມສະເໝີພາບຂອງສິດສ່ວນບຸກຄົນຜູ້ຊາຍ ຫຼື ຜູ້ຍິງ ແລະ ເຫັນວ່າ:ປະຊາຊົນເຫຼົ່ານັ້ນໄດ້ປະກາດຕົນເປັນຜູ້ຈະເລີນພໍແລ້ວທີ່ຈະຊ່ວຍສະໜັບສະໜູນຄວາມກ້າວໜ້າທາງດ້ານສັງຄົມປະລະຈະຈັດຕັ້ງມາດຕະຖານການຄອງຊີບໃຫ້ດີຍີ່ງຂື້ນໂດຍເສລີພາບອັນກວ້າງຂວາງ:
__label__lo ດ້ວຍເຫດວ່າ: ການບໍ່ຮັບຮູ້ ແລະ ໜີ່ນປະໝາດຕໍ່ສິດຂອງມະນຸດນັ້ນໄດ້ເປັນຕົ້ນເຫດໃຫ້ເກີດການກະທຳຢ່າງປ່າເຖື່ອນຊື່ງຈະເຮັດໃຫ້ແຄ້ນໃຈຕໍ່ມະໂນທຳຂອງມະນຸດ ແລະ ເຫັນວ່າການນຳຊື່ງໂລກມະນຸດທີ່ຈະມີອິດສະຫຼະໃນການສະແດງຄວາມເວົ້າ ແລະ ຄວາມເຊື່ອຖືຊື່ງຈະພົ້ນຈາກຄວາມຫວາດຫວັ່ນ ຢ້ານກົວ ແລະ ຍາກຈົນຂົ້ນແຄ້ນນັ້ນໄດ້ຖືກປະກາດວ່າ: ເປັນຄວາມປາຖະໜາອັນຍອດຍີ່ງຂອງມະນຸດ.
__label__lo ສິດສ່ວນນີ້ບໍ່ໃຫ້ອ້າງອອກໃດ້ໃນກໍລະນີທີ່ຄຳຮ້ອງຟ້ອງກ່າວຫາຫາກມີເຫດຜົນຕາມຄວາມຈິງອັນກ່ຽວແກ່ໂທດທາງກົດໝາຍລະຫວ່າງຊາດ ຫຼື ກ່ຽວເຖິງການກະທຳທີ່ຂັດຕໍ່ຫຼັກການ ແລະ ຄວາມມຸ້ງໝາຍຂອງສະຫະປະຊາຊາດ.
__label__lo ຄວາມເຈດຕະນາຂອງຊົນຊາດແມ່ນຫຼັກສຳຄັນຂອງອຳນາດສາທາລະນະ, ຄວາມເຈດຕະນານີ້ຕ້ອງໃຫ້ສະແດງອອກມາຕາມພິທີຄັດເລືອກຢ່າງສຸດຈະຫຼິດຊື່ງຈະຕ້ອງກະທຳກັນຕາມກຳນົດເວລາໂດຍມີການລົງຄະແນນສຽງສະເໝີກັນທົ່ວໄປ ແລະ ດ້ວຍພິທີລັບ ຫຼື ຕາມພິທີດຽວກັນທີ່ໄຫ້ເສລີພາບໃນການລົງຄະແນນສຽງ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນມີສິດເສລີພາບໃນຄວາມຄິດໃນຄວາມເຊື່ອຖື ແລະ ການຖືສາສະໜາ ສິດສ່ວນນີ້ກ່ຽວຂ້ອງດ້ວຍສິດເສລີພາບໃນການປ່ຽນສາສະໜາໃໝ່ ຫຼື ຄວາມເຊື່ອຖືຢ່າງຈິງໃຈ ແລະ ເສລີພາບໃນການສະແດງໃຫ້ເຫັນສາສະໜາຂອງຕົນ ຫຼື ຄວາມເຊື່ອຖືຢ່າງຈິງໃຈຂອງຕົນໃນການສອນໂດຍການກະທຳພິທີນະມັດສະການ ແລະ ປະຕິບັດຕາມຈາຮີດປະເພນີການສະແດງນັ້ນກະທຳໂດຍລຳພັງ ຫຼື ຮ່ວມໝູ່ຄະນະກໍ່ຕາມ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນມີສິດທີ່ຈະມີການສະຫງົບເກີດຂື້ນໃນດ້ານສັງຄົມ ແລະ ໃນດ້ານຕ່າງປະເທດເພື່ອຈະໃຫ້ມີສິດ ແລະ ເສລີພາບທັງມວນທີ່ໄດ້ກ່າວໃນໃບປະກາດສະບັບນີ້ດຳເນີນໄປຢ່າງສັກສິດສົມບູນ.
__label__lo ກອງປະຊຸມໃຫຍ່ສະຫະປະຊາຊາດໄດ້ຮັບຮອງ ແລະ ປະກາດສິດຂອງມວນມະນຸດຊື່ງພວກເຮົາໄດ້ຈັດພິມຂື້ນຕະຫຼອດບົດຫຼັງການປະກາດອັນເປັນປະຫວັດການນີ້ກອງປະຊຸມໃຫຍ່ໄດ້ຊີ້ແຈງກັບສະມາຊິກທຸກໆທ່ານຂໍຈົ່ງຢ່າໄດ້ປະລະເລີຍໂອກາດ ແລະ ວິທີທາງອັນໃດຊື່ງສາມາດຈະໄດ້ຮັບໃນອານາຄົດ, ເພື່ອເຜີຍແຜ່ໃຫ້ປະຊາຊົນໄດ້ຮັບແຈກຈ່າຍອ່ານ ແລະ ວິຈານສີ່ງສຳຄັນໃນໂຮງຮຽນ ແລະ ສະຖານສຶກສາໃດໆໂດຍບໍ່ຄຳນືງເຖິງລັດທິ, ການເມືອງຂອງເຮົາ ຫຼື ປະເທດໃດເລີຍ.
__label__lo ດ້ວຍເຫດວ່າ: ມີຄວາມສຳຄັນທີ່ຕ້ອງລະບຽບສິດປ້ອງກັນສິດທັງຫຼາຍຂອງມະນຸດເພື່ອບໍ່ໃຫ້ບຸກຄົນຖືກບັງຄັບໃຈໃຫ້ຕໍ່ສູ້ຄວາມບຽດບຽນຂ້ຽວແຂ້ນແລະຄວາມກົດຂີ່ຂົ່ມເຫງຈົນເຫຼືອວິໃສ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນຜູ້ໃດທີ່ຖືກກ່າວຫາກະທຳຜິດກົດໝາຍນັ້ນຕ້ອງໃຫ້ຖືວ່າບໍ່ມີຄວາມຜິດຈົນກວ່າຄວາມຜິດຂອງຜູ້ນັ້ນຈະປະກົດຂື້ນຕາມກົດໝາຍໃນລະຫວ່າງການດຳເນີນຄະດີຊ້ອງໜ້າປະຊາຊົນ ໃນລະຫວ່າງນັ້ນຕ້ອງໃຫ້ບຸກຄົນຜູ້ກ່ຽວຂ້ອງໄດ້ມີປະກັນອັນຄວນໃນການຕໍ່ສູ້ຄະດີຂອງຕົນ.
__label__lo ກອງປະຊຸມໃຫຍ່ຈື່ງປະກາດວ່າ:
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນຜູ້ໃດກໍ່ຈະມີສິດມີສັນຊາດ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນມີສິດທີ່ຈະເຮັດວຽກເຮັດການເລືອກການງານຂອງຕົນຕາມລຳເພີງໃຈຕາມກໍລະນີທີ່ເປັນທຳ ແລະ ພໍໃຈ ແລະ ມີສິດທີ່ຈະໄດ້ຮັບຄວາມຄຸ້ມຄອງຕໍ່ການຂາດງານທຳ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນມີສິດດຳລົງຊີວິດ ມີສິດເສລີພາບ ແລະ ຄວາມປອດໄພໃນຕົວ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນມີສິດທີ່ຈະທ່ອງທ່ຽວໄປມາໂດຍເສລີ ແລະ ເລືອກທີ່ຕັ້ງພູມລຳເນົາຢູ່ພາຍໃນລັດ ຫຼື ລັດໜື່ງ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນມີສິດເສລີພາບໃນການປະຊຸມ ແລະ ສະມາຄົມໃນທາງສັນຕິສຸກ.
__label__lo ໃນສະຖານໃດກໍ່ດີສິດ ແລະ ເສລີພາບເຫຼົ່ານີ້ບໍ່ຄວນໃຫ້ປະຕິບັດໄປໃນທາງຂັດຂວາງຕໍ່ຈຸດໝາຍ ແລະ ຫຼັກການຂອງສະຫະປະຊາຊາດ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນມີສິດທີ່ຈະຮັບຕຳແໜ່ງລາດສະການແຫ່ງປະເທດຂອງຕົນຕາມກໍລະນີສະເໝີພາກ.
__label__lo ບໍ່ມີຜູ້ໃດເລີຍທີ່ຈະຕ້ອງຖືວ່າ:ມີອາການເປັນທາດ ແລະ ເປັນຂ້ອຍເປັນຂ້າການເປັນທາດ ແລະ ຂ້າທາດນັ້ນ ເປັນສີ່ງທີ່ຕ້ອງຫ້າມທຸກປະການ.
__label__lo ດ້ວຍເຫດວ່າ: ເປັນຂໍ້ສຳຄັນທີ່ຕ້ອງເຊີດຊູສຳພັນທະໄມຕີລະຫວ່າງປະເທດຊາດໃຫ້ດີຍີ່ງຂື້ນ;
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນມີສິດທີ່ຈະຕັ້ງສະມາຄົມຂື້ນກັບພັກພວກອື່ນໆ ແລະ ເຂົາເປັນສະມາຊິກເພື່ອປ້ອງກັນຜົນປະໂຫບດຂອງຕົນ.
__label__lo ທຸກຄົນມີສິດທີ່ຈະໄດ້ຮັບຄ່າຈ້າງສົມກັບງານທີ່ທຳນັ້ນໂດຍບໍ່ມີການແຕກຕ່າງກັນ.
__label__lo ຄອບຄົວເປັນວັດຖຸທຳມະຊາດ ແລະ ຫຼັກສຳຄັນຂອງສັງຄົມ ແລະ ມີສິດທີ່ຈະໄດ້ຮັບຄວາມຄຸ້ມຄອງຈາດສັງຄົມ ແລະ ຈາກລັດ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນໃດກໍ່ມີໜ້າທີ່ຊື່ງຕ້ອງປະຕິບັດຕໍ່ໝູ່ຄະນະໃນສັງຄົມ; ຄວາມຈະເລີນແຫ່ງບຸກຄະລິກຂອງຕົນຈະດຳເນີນໄປໄດ້ຢ່າງເສລີ ແລະ ສົມບູນກໍ່ແຕ່ໃນວົງໝູ່ຄະນະເທົ່ານັ້ນ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນເມື່ອຖືກບຽດບຽນຂ້ຽວເຂັນນັ້ນສິດທີ່ຈະຫາທີ່ອາໄສ ແລະ ຮັບເອົາທີ່ອາໄສໃນປະເທດອື່ນກໍ່ໄດ້.
__label__lo ດ້ວຍເຫດວ່າ: ຄວາມເຂົ້າໃຈໃນສິດເສລີພາບເຫຼົ່ານີ້ໂດຍທົ່ວກັນເປັນຂໍ້ສຳຄັນຍີ່ງເພື່ອປະຕິບັດຕາມສັນຍານີ້ຢ່າງສົມບູນ.
__label__lo ບໍ່ມີຜູ້ໃດເລີຍທີ່ຈະຕ້ອງຖືກບັງຄັບໃກ້ເຂົ້າເປັນສະມາຊິກໃນສະມາຄົມໃດສະມາຄົມໜື່ງ.
__label__lo ພໍ່ແມ່ມີສິດກ່ອນເພີ່ນທີ່ຈະເລືອກເອົາຊະນິດການອົບຮົມສຶກສາທີ່ຈະໄຫ້ລູກຂອງຕົນໄດ້ຮັບນັ້ນ.
__label__lo ທຸກຄົນມີສິດທີ່ຈະເພີ່ງສານປະຈຳຊາດທີ່ມິອຳນາດເພື່ອຕໍ່ວ່າການກະທຳອັນເປັນການລະເມີດສິດສຳຄັນລັດຖະທຳມະນູນ ຫຼືກົດໝາຍໄດ້ຮັບຮູ້ແລ້ວນັ້ນ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນຜູ້ໃດກໍລະນີມີສິດທີ່ຈະຮັບຮູ້ນິໃສປະຈຳບຸກຄົນທີ່ປະຕິບັດກັນໃນທາງກົດໝາຍນະສະຖານທີ່ທຸກແຫ່ງ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນທຸກຄົນມີສິດທີ່ຈະຮ່ວມໃນການບໍລິຫານກິຈະການແຜ່ນດິນໃນປະເທດຂອງຕົນໂດຍຕົງກໍ່ດີໂດຍຜູ້ຕາງໜ້າທີ່ໄດ້ເລືອກຕາມອຳເພີໃຈແລ້ວກໍ່ດີ.
__label__lo ຜູ້ໃດຈະຖອນກຳມະສິດຂອງບຸກຄົນນັ້ນໂດຍລຳພັງໃຈບໍ່ໄດ້ເລີຍ.
__label__lo ຜູ້ໃດກໍ່ມີສິດທີ່ຈະໄດ້ຮັບຄວາມຄຸ້ມຄອງຈາກຜົນປະໂຫຍດທາງກາຍ ແລະ ໃຈອັນເກີດມາຈາກການດຳເນີນທຸກຢ່າງໃນດ້ານວິທະຍາສາດວັນນະຄະດີ ຫຼື ສິນລະປະຊື່ງຕົນເປັນເຈົ້າຂອງນັ້ນ.
__label__lo ບຸກຄົນໃດບໍ່ອາດຖືກຈັບກຸມຄຸມຂັງ ແລະ ເນລະເທດໂດຍລຳພັງໃຈເລີຍ.
__label__km ព្រះអង្គម្ចាស់សុភានុវង្ស (១៣ កក្កដា ១៩០៩ - ៩ មករា ១៩៩៥) ព្រះអង្គមានរហស្សនាមថា ព្រះអង្គម្ចាស់ក្រហម នៅជាមួយព្រះអនុជរបស់ព្រះអង្គម្ចាស់សុវណ្ណភូមា និងព្រះអង្គម្ចាស់បុណ្យអ៊ុម នៃខេត្តចម្ប៉ាសាក់ដែលជា “ព្រះអង្គម្ចាស់ទាំងបី” ដែលតំណាងឱ្យបក្សកុម្មុយនិស្ត (និយមវៀតណាម) អព្យាក្រឹតនិយមនិងគណបក្សនយោបាយរាជានិយមក្នុងប្រទេសឡាវ។ ព្រះអង្គសុភានុវង្ស បានក្លាយជាប្រធានាធិបតីនៃសាធារណរដ្ឋប្រជាមានិតឡាវ ចាប់ពីខែធ្នូ ឆ្នាំ១៩៧៥ ដល់ខែសីហា ឆ្នាំ១៩៩១។ សុភានុវង្ស គឺជាព្រះរាជបុត្រាមួយអង្គរបស់ព្រះអង្គម្ចាស់ប៊ុនខង និងជាឧបរាជចុងក្រោយរបស់ហ្លួងព្រះបាង។ ខុស​ពី​បង​ប្អូន​បង្កើត​របស់​គាត់សុវណ្ណភូមានិងភេតសារាជ រតនាវង្សា ដែល​មាន​មាតា​ជា​រាជបុត្រីនៃរាជវង្ស ចំណែកម្ដាយ​របស់​គាត់​គ្រាន់តែជា​មនុស្ស​សាមញ្ញម្នាក់គឺ​មុំ ខាំអ៊ូន។ ឯកសារយោង
__label__km ឧទ្យានជាតិខេត្តព្រះសីហនុ ស្តិតនៅរវាងកោះថ្មី និង ក្រុងព្រះសីហនុ មានចំងាយប្រហែល ១៨ គម ពីក្រុងព្រះសីហនុ។ ឧទ្យានជាតិនេះបានបើកនៅក្នុងឆ្នាំ ១៩៩៣ ដែលមានផ្ទៃដី ២១ ០០០ ហិកតា ដែលក្នុងនោះ ១៥​ ០០០ហិកតា ជាដីគោកតាមឆ្នេរសមុទ្រ និង ៦ ០០០ហិកតា ជាផ្ទៃទឹកសមុទ្រ។ ឧទ្យានជាតិនេះមាននូវ ឆ្នេរសមុទ្រដ៏ស្រស់ស្អាត និងមានផ្លូវអមតាមឆ្នេរសមុទ្រ ដើមកោងកាង ព្រៃភ្នំ និង សត្វស្លាបជាច្រើនប្រភេទ និង ឆ្នេរស្រស់បំព្រង ដូចជា កោះតាគាវ និង កោះឬស្សី ព្រមទាំងមាន ផ្ទះសំរាប់ស្នាក់នៅ មានសេវាកម្ម ម្ហូបអាហារ និងទូកសំរាប់ ធ្វើដំណើរទៀតផង។ សមុទ្ររាមមានចំងាយប្រមាណ ៣០គឺឡូម៉ែត្រ ពី​ក្រុងព្រះសីហនុ និងមានសេវាកម្មជាច្រើន សំរាប់ភ្ញៀវទេសចរណ៍ ក៏ដូចជាឆ្នេរខ្សាច់យ៉ាងស្រស់ស្អាត ដែលមិនអាចបំភ្លេចបាន។ មានកន្លែងសំរាប់កំសាន្ត និងមានទូកសំរាប់ធ្វើដំណើរទៅទស្សនាតាមតំបន់កោះជាច្រើន ដូចជា កោះតាគាវ កោះឬស្សី កោះស្រមោច និងមានកោះជាច្រើនទៀត ដែលមានឆ្នេរខ្សាច់ស្អាត និងអាចមើលផ្កាថ្ម ព្រមទាំងមាន ទេសភាពគួរជាទីគយគន់។ តំបន់រាមជាកន្លែង សំរាប់បងប្អូនកងទ័ព រស់នៅ និង ជាកន្លែងការពារដែនដីទឹក របស់ប្រទេសជាតិ។ បច្ចុប្បន្នមានកងទ័ពជាច្រើន ដែលបានជួយការពារបូរណៈភាពទឹកដីនៅទីនោះ ជាពិសេសយុវជន ជំនាន់ក្រោយ ដែលជា ទំពាំងស្នងឬស្សី ជួយការពារទឹកដី ដើម្បីប្រទេសជាតិខ្មែរយើង។ ក្រុងព្រះសីហនុ ​ កោះ ទេសចរណ៍
__label__km Nanchang Q-5 (ភាសាចិន: 强 -5 pinyin: Qiang-5; អង្គការណាតូឈ្មោះរាយការណ៍: Fantan) ត្រូវបានគេស្គាល់ផងដែរថាជាមួយ 5 ការនាំចេញនៅក្នុងកំណែរបស់វាគឺជាយន្តហោះដីវាយប្រហារ-យន្តហោះនៅប្រទេសចិនបានស្ថាបនាឡើងដោយផ្អែកលើសូវៀត MiG-19 ។ តួនាទីចម្បងរបស់វាគឺការគាំទ្រអាកាសជិតស្និទ្ធ។ ឯកសារយោង តំនភ្ជាប់ក្រៅ Nanchang Q-5 photo collection and introduction Q5 Internal Weapon Bay យន្តហោះយោធា
__label__km ({{lang-en| $ Commune}}) ជាដែនរដ្ឋបាលស្ថិតនៅក្នុង ស្រុកកំពង់ត្រាច ខេត្តកំពត មាន ភូមិ៖ ព្រំប្រទល់នៃ តាមអនុក្រឹត្យលេខ ២៣៣ អនក្រ.បក បានប្តូរឈ្មោះ ឃុំកន្ថោរខាងកើត ទៅជាឃុំភ្នំប្រាសាទ តាមអនុក្រឹត្យលេខ ២៣៣ អនក្រ.បក ចុះថ្ងៃទី ២៩ ខែធ្នូ ឆ្នាំ២០០៩។ (Phnom Prasat) ស្ថិតនៅ ស្រុកកំពង់ត្រាច ខេត្តកំពត មាន ភូមិ÷ Boundary East ឃុំព្រែកក្រឹស​ ​ស្រុកកំពង់ត្រាច និងស្រុកបន្ទាយមាស West ឃុមកន្ថោរខាងលិច ​ស្រុកកំពង់ត្រាច South ឃុំព្រែកក្រឹស​ ឃុំបឹងសាលាខាងកើត​ ស្រុកកំពង់ត្រាច North ស្រុកបន្ទាយមាស និងឃុំកន្ថោរខាងលិច ស្រុកកំពង់ត្រាច
__label__km អភិបាលរាជធានីភ្នំពេញ គឺជាប្រមុខថ្នាក់ដឹកនាំរដ្ឋាភិបាលមូលដ្ឋានសម្រាប់រាជធានីភ្នំពេញ។ បញ្ជីរាយនាម អភិបាលរាជធានីភ្នំពេញ អភិបាលក្រុងភ្នំពេញ ពីឆ្នាំ ១៩៤១ ដល់ឆ្នាំ ១៩៧០៖ ឯកឧត្តម ញឹក ជូឡុង ឯកឧត្តម មៀច គន្ធ ឯកឧត្តម ទេព ផន ឯកឧត្តម អ៊ុន ត្រមុច ឯកឧត្តម អ៊ី ទុយ អភិបាលក្រុងភ្នំពេញ ពីឆ្នាំ ១៩៧០ ដល់ឆ្នាំ ១៩៧៥៖ ឯកឧត្តម អ៊ុង ហៀម ឯកឧត្តម ឆាយ គឹមហុង ឯកឧត្តម ហ៊ូ ហង់ស៊ីន ចាប់ពីឆ្នាំ១៩៧៥ រហូតដល់ឆ្នាំ១៩៧៩ សាលាក្រុងភ្នំពេញត្រូវឋិតនៅក្រោមការគ្រប់គ្រងរបស់របប កម្ពុជាប្រជាធិបតេយ្យ។​ នៅកំឡុងពេលនោះពុំមានការ កត់ត្រាឈ្មោះអភិបាល ឬអ្នកគ្រប់គ្រងទេ គឺយើងគ្រាន់តែបានដឹងថា សាលាក្រុងឋិតក្រោមការគ្រប់គ្រងផ្ទាល់ពីគណៈ កម្មការមជ្ឈឹមបក្ស។ កំណត់ចំណាំ មើលផងដែរ រាជរដ្ឋាភិបាលកម្ពុជា នយោបាយកម្ពុជា តំណភ្ជាប់ខាងក្រៅ អតីតអភិបាលរាជធានី នៅលើគេហទំព័រសាលារាជធានីភ្នំពេញ ភ្នំពេញ
__label__km () ដែនរដ្ឋបាលស្ថិតនៅក្នុង ស្រុកពោធិ៍រៀង ខេត្តព្រៃវែង មានរដ្ឋបាលចំណុះ ៤ភូមិ÷ អប់រំ បឋមសិក្សា អនុវិទ្យាល័យ សាសនា ព្រះពុទ្ធសាសនា វត្ត ផ្សារ រមណីដ្ឋាន ឯកសារពិគ្រោះ គណកម្មការជាតិរៀបចំការបោះឆ្នោត ខេត្តព្រៃវែង
__label__km 300px|រូបភាពតូច Guizhou JL-9, ត្រូវបានគេស្គាល់ផងដែរថាជាការ FTC-2000 ភ្នំឥន្ទ្រី (Shanying) ជាពីរកៅអីចម្បាំងគ្រូបង្វឹក-បានបង្កើតឡើងដោយក្រុមហ៊ុននាំចូល / នាំចេញគួយចូវអាកាសចរណ៍ឧស្សាហកម្ម (GAIEC) សម្រាប់រំដោះកងទ័ពកងទ័ពអាកាសប្រជាជន (PLAAF) និង កងទ័ពរំដោះកងទ័ពជើងទឹកកងទ័ពប្រជាជនអាកាស (PLANAF) ។ ឯកសារយោង តំនភ្ជាប់ក្រៅ យន្តហោះ
__label__km ព្រឹត្តិការណ៍ ២៥ ​កុម្ភៈ – សហភាពសូវៀតកាន់កាប់ប្រទេសហ្សកហ្ស៊ី ។ ១៣​ មីនា – ម៉ុងហ្គោលីទទួល​បាន​ឯករាជ្យ​ពីចិន ។ ២៧ កក្កដា – ក្រុមអ្នកស្រាវជ្រាវសាកលវិទ្យាល័យតូរ៉ុនតូដែលដឹកនាំដោយហ្វ្រេ​ឌ្រិ​ច បែនត៊ីង បានរកឃើញអរម៉ូនអាំង​សូលី​ន ។ ថ្ងៃខួបកំណើត ៦ កក្កដា – ណែនស៊ី​ រីហ្គែន តារាសម្តែងនិងស្ត្រីទីមួយនៃសហរដ្ឋអាមេរិក ។ ថ្ងៃ​មរណភាព រង្វាន់ណូបែល ឆ្នាំ​ ១៩២១
__label__km សំហេង បូរ៉ា ( អង់គ្លេស ៖ Samheng Bora កើតថ្ងៃទី២៤ ខែកុម្ភៈ ឆ្នាំ១៩៨៦) ជារដ្ឋលេខាធិការក្រសួងពាណិជ្ជកម្មនៃព្រះរាជាណាចក្រកម្ពុជា។ បច្ចុប្បន្ន ឯកឧត្តម សំហេង បូរ៉ា ត្រូវបានតែងតាំងជានាយករងខុទ្ទកាល័យក្រសួងពាណិជ្ជកម្ម កាលពីថ្ងៃទី២៤ ខែសីហា ឆ្នាំ២០២៣ សម្រាប់នីតិកាលទី៧ ដែលមាន លោកជំទាវ ចម និម្មល ជារដ្ឋមន្ត្រីក្រសួងពាណិជ្ជកម្ម។ មើលផងដែរ គេហទំព័រផ្លូវការនៃក្រសួងពាណិជ្ជកម្ម ឯកសារយោង បុគ្គលនៅរស់ កម្ពុជា
__label__km ព្រះស៊ុនទរវោហារ (ភូ) ( , ; ថ្ងៃទី២៦ ខែមិថុនា ឆ្នាំ១៧៨៦ – ត្រូវបានគេស្គាល់ថា ស៊ុនទរភូ ) គឺជាកវីស្តេចដ៏ល្បីរបស់ប្រទេសថៃ ។ លោក​បាន​សរសេរ​ក្នុងសម័យរតនកោសិន្ទ្រ៍ ។ អាជីអាជីពជាកវីរបស់លោកភូ បាន​ចាប់​ផ្ដើម​នៅ​ក្នុង​រជ្ជកាល​ព្រះបាទរាមាទី២ ហើយ​ពេល​ស្ដេច​សោយ​ទិវង្គត ព្រះអង្គ​បាន​លាលែង​ពី​តួនាទី​ទៅ​បួស​ជា​ព្រះសង្ឃ។ ម្ភៃឆ្នាំក្រោយមក ក្នុងរជ្ជកាលព្រះបាទរាមាទី៣ ព្រះអង្គបានយាងត្រឡប់មកតុលាការវិញ ក្នុងឋានៈជាស្មៀនរាជ ដែលទ្រង់គង់នៅអស់មួយជីវិត។ ភូ មានភាពល្បីល្បាញខាងការតែងកំណាព្យ ហើយកំណាព្យវីរភាពរបស់គាត់គឺពេញនិយមនៅក្នុងប្រទេសថៃរហូតមកដល់បច្ចុប្បន្ន។ ស្នាដៃរបស់គាត់រួមមាន និរាសពោខៅទង ដែលជាបណ្តុំនៃកំណាព្យរៀបរាប់ដំណើររបស់គាត់ទៅកាន់ភ្នំមាស។ និរាសសុពណ៌ ដំណើររបស់គាត់ទៅកាន់ខេត្តសុពណ៌បុរី ; និង​រឿងព្រះអភ័យម៉ានី ។ ឯកសារយោង Articles containing Thai-language text
__label__km សំដៅដល់÷ ភូមិរកា ឃុំរកា ស្រុកពារាំង ខេត្តព្រៃវែង ភូមិរកា សង្កាត់ស្រយ៉ូវ ក្រុងស្ទឹងសែន ខេត្តកំពង់ធំ ភូមិរកា ឃុំកំពង់ចិនជើង ស្រុកស្ទោង ខេត្តកំពង់ធំ ភូមិរកា ឃុំអង្គតាសូ ស្រុកស្វាយជ្រំ ខេត្តស្វាយរៀង ភូមិរកា ឃុំគោកដូង ស្រុកអង្គរជុំ ខែត្រសៀមរាម
__label__km កីឡាអាស៊ីខាងត្បូងលើកទី៥ត្រូវបានធ្វើឡើងនៅទីក្រុងកូឡុំបូ ប្រទេស ស្រីលង្កា នៅឆ្នាំ១៩៩១។ កំនត់ត្រាមេដាយ (ប្រទេសម្ចាស់ផ្ទះត្រូវបានដាក់ពណ៌) ព្រឹត្តិការណ៍កីឡា តិននីស បាញ់កាំភ្លើង បាល់ទាត់ បាល់ទះ បាល់បោះ ប្រដាល់ លើកទំងន់ វាយកូនឈ្លីលើតុ ហែលទឹក អត្តពលកម្ម កីឡាអាស៊ីខាងត្បូង
__label__km អែគុកហ្កា ឬ បទចម្រៀងស្នេហាជាតិ ( Hanja ៖ 愛國歌 MC: Aegukga, MR: Aegukka) គឺជាភ្លេងជាតិប្រទេសកូរ៉េខាងត្បូង ជឿ​ថាទំនុកច្រៀងត្រូវបានតែងនៅពេល គ.ស.១៨៩៦ ដោយអ្នកនយោបាយឈ្មោះ អាន់ ឆាងហ៉ូ (안창호) មេដឹកនាំនៅក្នុងសមរភូមិដើម្បីឯករាជ្យភាពរបស់កូរ៉េ ហើយជាអ្នកអប់រំ ទំនុកច្រៀង ប្រែ​ជា ដរាបណាសមុទ្រ (동해) ស្ងួតភ្នំបែកទូ (백두산) បំបែក សូមព្រះជាម្ចាស់ការពារនិងការពារប្រទេសរបស់យើង Refrain ផ្កាកុលាបសារ៉ុននិងបីពាន់នាក់រី ពោរពេញទៅដោយភ្នំនិងទន្លេដ៏អស្ចារ្យ ជនជាតិកូរ៉េអស្ចារ្យ ទៅវិធីកូរ៉េដ៏អស្ចារ្យ តែងតែនៅជាការពិត ក្នុងនាមជាកំពូលភ្នំស្រល់ណាមសាន់កំពូលឈររឹងមាំ មិនផ្លាស់ប្តូរតាមរយៈខ្យល់និងសាយសត្វ ដូចជារុំដោយគ្រឿងសឹក ដូច្នេះនឹងស្មារតីធន់របស់យើង Refrain មេឃរដូវស្លឹកឈើជ្រុះគឺទទេហើយធំទូលាយខ្ពស់និងគ្មានពពក ព្រះច័ន្ទភ្លឺដូចដួងចិត្តរបស់យើងអវិភាគនិងការពិត Refrain ដោយស្មារតីនិងគំនិតនេះសូមឱ្យយើងផ្តល់ភាពស្មោះត្រង់ទាំងអស់ នៅក្នុងការរងទុក្ខឬអំណរស្រលាញ់ជាតិយើង Refrain ភ្លេងជាតិ
__label__km ឃុំកោះរការ ស្ថិតនៅ ស្រុកកំពង់សៀម ខេត្តកំពង់ចាម។ រដ្ឋបាល ឃុំកោះរការ មាន ៧ភូមិគឺ÷ ដំបងដែក កោះរកាក្នុង កោះរកាក្រៅ អូរឈ្លើង តាមាង ថ្មី កោះគល់ អប់រំ បឋមសិក្សា អនុវិទ្យាល័យ សាសនា ព្រះពុទ្ធសាសនា វត្ត ផ្សារ រមណីដ្ឋាន ឯកសារពិគ្រោះ គណកម្មការជាតិរៀបចំការបោះឆ្នោត ខេត្តកំពង់ចាម
__label__km ព្រះបាទសម្ដេចព្រះណាង់ក្លៅចៅយូហួ (ភាសាសៀម៖ พระบาทสมเด็จพระนั่งเกล้าเจ้าอยู่หัว, ៣១ មីនា ១៧៨៨ - ២ មេសា ១៨៥១) នាមពីកំណើតថា ថាប់ (ភាសាសៀម៖ ทับ) ឬ រាមាទី៣ ឬ ចេស្ដាបតិន្ទ្រ គឺជាព្រះមហាក្សត្រទីបីនៃសៀមក្រោមរាជវង្សចក្រី​ដោយគ្រងរាជ្យពីថ្ងៃទី២១ ខែកក្កដា ឆ្នាំ១៨២៤ ដល់ថ្ងៃទី២ ខែមេសា ឆ្នាំ១៨៥១។ តំណ​ភ្ជាប់​ក្រៅ ព្រះមហាក្សត្រថៃ រាជវង្សចក្រី
__label__km អាស៊ីតនុយក្លេអិក (; ) ជាប៉ូលីមែរបស់នុយក្លេអូទីតដែលភ្ជាប់គ្នាជាមួយសម្ព័ន្ធផូស្វរឌីអេស្ទែ ដោយក្រុមនៃផូស្វាតដែលជាសមាសភាគនៃសម្ព័ន្ធនឹងភ្ជាប់គ្នារវាងក្រុមអ៊ីដ្រុកស៊ីលនៅតំណែងទី 5' នៃនុយក្លេអូទីតម៉ូលេគុលមួយជាមួយនឹងក្រុមអ៊ីដ្រុកស៊ីលនៅតំណែងទី 3' នៃម៉ូលេគុលបន្ទាប់ ធ្វើឲ្យនុយក្លេអូទីតមានសមាសភាគនៃគ្រោងជាភូស្វាតនិងស្ករ និងមានខ្នែងចំហៀងជាបាស អាចបែងចែកបានជា DNA និង RNA។ អាស៊ីតនុយក្លេអ៊ិច
__label__km បទ ស្ដាយ​ក្រោយ ជា​បទ​ល្បី​របស់​ ខាន់ ជែមស៍ ក្នុង អាល់ប៊ុម អូន​ផឹក​ដើម្បី​បង នៃ ផលិតកម្ម​រ៉ក់។ បទ​នេះ​និពន្ធ​បទភ្លេង និង​ទំនុកច្រៀង​​ដោយ​លោក សួន ពិសិដ្ឋ។ បទ​ចម្រៀង​មាន​ន័យ​សោកសង្រែង​ព្រោះ​អ្នក​ជាទីស្រឡាញ់​បាន​ស្លាប់​ចោល​ដោយសារ​តែ​កំហុស​ខ្លួនឯង​ដែល​មិន​យល់​ពី​ជម្រៅ​ចិត្ត​របស់​នាង។ បទចម្រៀង
__label__km ជីវប្រវត្តិ លោក នួន កន កើត​នៅ​ថ្ងៃទី១៨ ខែមិថុនា ឆ្នាំ១៩៣៧ នៅសង្កាត់​​លេខ​៤ ក្រុង​ភ្នំពេញ។ ស្នាដៃ ល្អផង ពិរោះផង រឿងល្ខោន ជាប់​ចំណាត់​ថ្នាក់​លេខ២ ប្រលង​ប្រជែង​ទូទៅអក្សរសាស្រ្ត ដាវ​ជោគជ័យ រឿងល្ខោន បទពង្សាវតារខ្មែរ ឯកសារយោង សៀវភៅប្រវត្តិអ្នកនិពន្ធខ្មែរ,​ លោកជ័យចាប, ឆ្នាំ១៩៨៨ អ្នកនិពន្ធល្បី អ្នកនិពន្ធនាសតវត្សទី២០
__label__km ប្លេគភីង ( ) គឺជាក្រុមតន្រ្តី Girl Group កូរ៉េខាងត្បូង បង្កើតឡើងដោយ YG Entertainment មានសមាជិក ជីស៊ូ ជេនី រ៉ូស៊េ និងលីហ្សា ក្រុមនេះបានចាប់ផ្តើម ៨ សីហា ២០១៦ ជាមួយអាល់ប៊ុមទោលរបស់ពួកគេ Square One ដែលបង្កើត "Whistle" បទចម្រៀងលេខមួយដំបូងរបស់ពួកគេនៅក្នុងកូរ៉េខាងត្បូង ក៏ដូចជា ប៊ុមបាយ៉ាហ៍ (Boombayah) លេខទីមួយរបស់ពួកគេបុកនៅលើ Billboard World Digital Songs chart ជាមួយនឹងភាពជោគជ័យផ្នែកពាណិជ្ជកម្មដំបូងរបស់ក្រុមពួកគេត្រូវបានគេសរសើរថាជាសិល្បករថ្មីប្រចាំឆ្នាំនៅទី ៣១ Golden Disc Awards និងទី ២៦ Seoul Music Awards.Blackpinkមានឈ្មោះថាជាThe Biggest Girl Group In The World(ក្រុមតន្រ្ដីនារីដ៏ធំបំផុតនៅលើពិភពលោក) សមាជិកម្នាក់ៗសុទ្ធតែមានbrandតំណាងអោយរាងៗខ្លួនដូចជា JennieជាGlobal Brand Ambassadorរបស់Chanel,JisooជាGlobal Brand Ambassador របស់Dior,RoséជាGlobal Brand Ambassador របស់YSL និងLisaជាGlobal Brand Ambassadorរបស់Celine ក្រុមតន្រ្តីកូរ៉េ
__label__km () ដែនរដ្ឋបាលស្ថិតនៅក្នុង ក្រុងសំរោង ខេត្តឧត្តរមានជ័យ មាន ភូមិ÷ 1 22040101 បន្សាយរាក់ Bansay Reak ប្រកាសលេខ ១៧ អនក្រ.បក 2 22040102 កំណប់ Kamnab ប្រកាសលេខ ៤៩៣ ប្រ.ក 3 22040103 រំដួលវាសនា Rumduol Veasna ប្រកាសលេខ ៤៩៣ ប្រ.ក 4 22040104 សំបួរមាស Sambuor Meas ប្រកាសលេខ ៤៩៣ ប្រ.ក 5 22040105 ត្នោត Tnaot ប្រកាសលេខ ៤៩៣ ប្រ.ក 6 22040106 កសិ-ទេពពោធិវង្ស Kakse-Tepporthivong ប្រកាសលេខ ២៣៩៤ ប្រក 7 22040107 ខ្នាចឫស្សី Khnach Ruessei ប្រកាសលេខ ៤០០៨ ប្រក បំបែកចេញពីភូមិកសិ-ទេពពោធិវង្ស 8 22040108 ត្រពាំងម្អមសែនជ័យ Trapeang Maom Saen Chey ព្រំប្រទល់នៃ Boundary East សង្កាត់កូនក្រៀល សង្កាត់សំរោង ក្រុងសំរោង West ឃុំគោកខ្ពស់ ស្រុកបន្ទាយអំពិល South សង្កាត់បុស្បូវ សង្កាត់សំរោង ក្រុងសំរោង North ប្រទេសថៃឡង់ដ៏
__label__km សន្ធិសញ្ញាប្រេស្ត-លីតូវស្ក (The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk) គឺជា​សន្ធិសញ្ញា​សន្តិភាព​មួយ ដែល​ត្រូវ​បាន​ចុះហត្ថលេខា នា​ថ្ងៃទី​០៣ ខែ​មីនា ឆ្នាំ​១៩១៨ នៅ​ទីក្រុងប្រេស្ត-លីតូវស្ក (បច្ចុប្បន្ន​ទីក្រុងប្រេស្ត ប្រទេស​បេឡារុស) ដោយ​សូវៀតរុស្ស៊ី និង មហាអំណាច​កណ្ដាល (ចក្រភពអាល្លឺម៉ង់ អូទ្រីស-ហុងគ្រី អូតូម៉ង់ និង បុលការី) ដែល​បាន​ដក​ប្រទេស​រុស្ស៊ី​ចេញពី​សង្គ្រាមលោកលើកទី១​។ កិច្ចចរចា​សន្តិភាព កិច្ចចរចា​សន្តិភាព បាន​ចាប់ផ្ដើម​នៅ​ថ្ងៃទី​២២ ខែ​ធ្នូ ឆ្នាំ​១៩១៧ មួយ​សប្ដាហ៍​ក្រោយពី​បញ្ចប់​ការឈប់បាញ់​រវាង​រុស្ស៊ី និង មហាអំណាច​កណ្ដាល នៅ​ទីក្រុងប្រេស្ត-លីតូវស្ក​។ ភាគី​ចក្រភពអាល្លឺម៉ង់ តំណាងដោយ​អនុរដ្ឋមន្ត្រី​ការបរទេស Richard von Kühlmann, ចក្រភពអូទ្រីស-ហុងគ្រី តំណាងដោយ​រដ្ឋមន្ត្រី​ការបរទេស Ottokar Czernin, ចក្រភពអូតូម៉ង់ អញ្ជើញ​ចូលរួម​ដោយ Talat Pasha ។
__label__km ព័ត៌មានទូទៅ រូបភាពតូច ព្រៃឈើបៃតងខ្ចី រំលេចនូវថ្មធម្មជាតិ និងខ្លះរាយប៉ាយនៅខាងក្រោម គឺជាទស្សនីយភាពដ៏គួរឱ្យទាក់ទាញមួយមើលពីពើងតាខុ ឬពើងជ្រួញ ដែលទើបត្រូវបានបើកឲ្យចូលកម្សាន្តកាលពីឆ្នាំ២០១៨។ ផ្ទាំងថ្មធំសម្បើមលយចេញពីជួរភ្នំ មានផ្ទៃធំទូលាយល្មមអាចឲ្យភ្ញៀវទេសចរ ដែលធ្វើដំណើរឡើងទៅលើខ្នងភ្នំគូលែន ឬឈ្មោះដើម មហេន្ទ្របព៌ត អាចឆៀងចូលគយគន់ទិដ្ឋភាពស្រស់ត្រកាលនៃសម្រស់ធម្មជាតិមួយផ្នែកនៃអតីតរាជធានីបុរាណរបស់កម្ពុជាមួយនេះ។ ទីនេះ ក៏ជាចំណុចស័ក្តិសមបំផុតសម្រាប់ការថតរូបដ៏ពេញនិយម ដែលបង្ហាញពីភាពស្រៀវខ្លួនផងដែរ។ ធ្វើដំណើរពីជើងភ្នំនៅត្រង់ចំណុចបង់ប្រាក់ប្រមាណ ៣ គីឡូម៉ែត្រ ភ្ញៀវទេសចរនឹងចូលមកដល់ច្រកចូលពើងតាខុ ឬពើងជ្រួញ ដែលមានដាក់ស្លាកសម្គាល់នៅឆ្វេងដៃ ដោយត្រូវបន្តដំណើរកាត់ព្រៃចម្ងាយ ៥០ម៉ែត្រ ទើបទៅដល់ទីនោះ។ នៅពេលរាត្រី មានភ្ញៀវទេសចរជាតិ និងអន្តរជាតិមួយចំនួន ច្រើនមកអាំងសាច់ គយគន់ផ្កាយ បោះតង់សម្រាកលេងកម្សាន្តនៅទីនោះយ៉ាងមានសុវត្ថិភាពផងដែរ តែកុំបោះចោលសំរាមបែបអណាធិបតេយ្យឲ្យសោះ។ ភ្នំគូលែន ជាអតីតទីក្រុងបុរាណ ដ៏អច្ឆរិយៈ និងល្បីល្បាញមួយនាសម័យអង្គរ ស្ថិតនៅទិសឦសាន ដែលមានចម្ងាយប្រមាណ៥០គីឡូម៉ែត្រ ពីទីរួមខេត្តសៀមរាប។ ភ្នំគូលែន សម្បូររមណីយដ្ឋានធម្មជាតិ និងប្រវត្តិសាស្រ្តជាច្រើនកន្លែង ដែលបាន និងកំពុងទាក់ទាញភ្ញៀវទេសចរជាតិ និងអន្តរជាតិទៅកម្សាន្ត និងសិក្សាស្រាវជ្រាវជាហូរហែ។ ឯកសារយោង
__label__km អ្នកកាសែតនៅនៅវិទ្យុអាស៊ីសេរីដ៏មានប្រជាប្រិយ៍មួយរូប។ លោក ជុន ច័ន្ទបុត្រ មានជំនាញជាអ្នកសម្របសម្រួលកិច្ចសម្ភាសន៍តាមវិទ្យុដែលហ៊ានសួរដេញដោលអ្នកនយោបាយ និងអ្នកវិភាគប្រកបដោយភាពក្លាហាន និងរឹងមាំមិនចាញ់ច្រាបអ្នកនយោបាយឡើយ។
__label__km រូបសំណាកឯកភាព គឺជា រូបសំណាកដែលខ្ពស់ជាងគេ លើពិភពលោក ដែលមានកម្ពស់ មានទីតាំងនៅរដ្ឋ ហ្គូចារ៉ាត ប្រទេសឥណ្ឌា។ វាពណ៌នាអំពីរដ្ឋបុរសឥណ្ឌា និងសកម្មជន ឯករាជ្យ វ៉ាឡាបាហៃ ប៉ាតេល (1875-1950) ដែលជា ឧបនាយករដ្ឋមន្ត្រី ទីមួយ និង ជារដ្ឋមន្ត្រីក្រសួងមហាផ្ទៃ ឯករាជ្យរបស់ឥណ្ឌា និងជាអ្នកកាន់សាសនា មហាត្មៈគន្ធី ។ ប៉ាតេល ត្រូវបានគេគោរពយ៉ាងខ្លាំងចំពោះការដឹកនាំរបស់គាត់ក្នុងការបង្រួបបង្រួម រដ្ឋសំខាន់ៗ ចំនួន 562 នៃប្រទេសឥណ្ឌាដើម្បី បង្កើតសហភាពតែមួយនៃប្រទេសឥណ្ឌា ។ នៅរដ្ឋហ្គូចារ៉ាត រូបសំណាកនេះត្រូវបានគេរកឃើញនៅ ទន្លេណាម៉ាដា ក្នុងអាណានិគម ខេវ៉ាឌីយ៉ា ប្រឈមមុខនឹង ទំនប់ សាដារ សារ៉ូវារ ភាគអាគ្នេយ៍នៃទីក្រុង វ៉ាដូដារ៉ា ។
__label__km សិល្ប៍ជៃ ក្រោយពីព្រះបាទបរមរាជារាមាធិបតី បានឡើងសោយរាជ្យវេលាណាមក ព្រះបរមបពិត្រពញាសួស ព្រះអង្គទ្រង់ប្រព្រឹត្តដោយយុត្តិធម៌ ឥតមានល្អៀងពី ព្រះរាជបណ្ដាំ ដែលសម្ដេចព្រះជេដ្ឋា ទ្រង់ផ្ដាំទាំងប៉ុន្មានៗ ក៏ទ្រង់ធ្វើតាមគ្រប់ជំពូក។ ព្រះអង្គចំណាយព្រះរាជទ្រព្យ ឲ្យសាងវត្តអារាម ឲ្យជួសជុលព្រះអារាម ដែលពុកបាក់បែកនោះប្រមាណជាង ១០០ ព្រះវិហារ។ រាស្ត្រប្រជា ក្នុងព្រះរាជាណាចក្រ បានសុខសប្បាយគ្រប់គ្នា, ភ្លៀងក៏ធ្លាក់ត្រូវរដូវ រាស្ត្រធ្វើស្រែចំការ បានផលច្រើន, ផលប្រយោជន៍ក្នុងព្រះនគរ ក៏ចម្រើនច្រើន។ ក្នុងឆ្នាំច ទោស័ក ព.ស. ១៦១៤ គ.ស ១០៧០, ម.ស ៩៩២, ច.ស ៤៣២ ព្រះអង្គសោយរាជ្យបាន ២២ឆ្នាំ មានម្នាក់ឈ្មោះ ជៃ បានទៅតាំងសិល្ប៍នៅភ្នំខ្ជោល ហើយលើកខ្លួនជាអ្នកមានបុណ្យ។ លុះការណ៍នេះ បានជ្រាបដល់ព្រះបរមបពិត្រហើយ, ស្ដេចក៏ត្រាស់ប្រើសម្ដេចចៅពញាចក្រី, សម្ដេចចៅពញាក្រឡាហោម ឲ្យលើកយោធាទាហានទៅប្រាបប្រាម។ សេនាទាហាន ចាប់បានខ្លួនសិល្ប៍ជៃ ហើយក៏ប្រហារជីវិតទៅ។ លុះបានជោគជ័យសព្វគ្រប់ហើយ មេទ័ពទាំងពីរនោះ ក៏ចូលមកក្រាបបង្គំទូល តាមកិច្ចការ។ ព្រះបរមបពិត្រ ទ្រង់ជ្រាបហើយ ទ្រង់ព្រះអំណរណាស់ ទ្រង់ប្រទានរង្វាន់ នាយទ័យ នាយកង តាមគុណបំណាច់ ដែលប្រើបាន។ ព្រះនគរក៏បានសុខក្សេមក្សាន្តតរៀងមកទៀត។ អ្នកសិល្ប៍ខ្មែរក្នុងរឿងនិទានអ្នកបះបោរខ្មែរក្នុងរឿងនិទាន
__label__km វីគីលីគ​បាន​ដាក់​ឈ្មោះ​ក្រៅ​ឲ្យ​យាយ ភូ (杨丹葡）និង ឡាវ ម៉េងឃីន（刘明勤） ថា​«ប្តីប្រ​ពន្ធ​អំណាច»។ ដោយ​ត្រូវ​បាន​ចាត់​ទុក​ថា ​ជា​ប្តី​ប្រពន្ធ​ដែល​មាន​ទំនាក់​ទំនង​ខាង​សេដ្ឋ​កិច្ច​និង​នយោបាយ​បំផុត​​ ក្នុង ​ប្រទេស​កម្ពុជា យាយ ភូ និង​ ឡាវ ម៉េងឃីន សមាជិក​ព្រឹទ្ធ​សភា​របស់​គណ​បក្ស​ប្រ​ជា​ជន​កម្ពុជា ​គឺ​ជា​សហ​ម្ចាស់​កម្ម​សិទ្ធិ​ក្រុម​ហ៊ុន ​Pheapimex ។ លោក​ឡាវ ម៉េងឃីន ក៏​បាន​គ្រប់​គ្រង​ Shukaku Inc និង​មាន​ទំនាក់​ទំនង​យ៉ាង​ជិត​ស្និទ្ធ​ជា​មួយ​លោក ហ៊ុន​សែន និង​លោក ជំទាវ ប៊ុន រ៉ានី ៕ សេដ្ឋីស្រុកខ្មែរ|សេដ្ឋី|សេដ្ឋីក្នុងលោក
__label__km សម្តេចព្រះមហិតលាធិបេស អតុល្យតេជវិក្រមព្រះបរមរាជជនក ( កើតថ្ងៃទី១ ខែមករា ឆ្នាំ១៨៩២ ដល់ថ្ងៃទី២៤ ខែកញ្ញា ឆ្នាំ១៩២៩) អតីតព្រះមហាក្សត្រ សម្តេចចៅហាមហិតលអតុល្យតេជ ក្រមហ្លួងសង្ខលានគរិន្ទ្រ៍ ( ឬ ហាម្ហិតលសង្ខលា គឺជាបិតារបស់ស្តេចអានន្ទមហិតល ( រាមាទី៨) និងស្តេចភូមិពលអតុល្យតេជ ( រាមាទី៩) នៃប្រទេសថៃ និងជាព្រះអយ្យកោរបស់ស្តេចវជិរាលង្ករណ៍ ( រាមាទី១០ ) ។ លោក​ក៏​ត្រូវ​បាន​គេ​ចាត់​ទុក​ថា​ជា​បិតា​ឱសថ​ទំនើប និង​សុខភាព​សាធារណៈ​នៅ​ប្រទេស​ថៃ។ លោកក៏បានបង្កើត រាជវង្សមហិតល ឬ រាជវង្សនៃថៃ នាពេលបច្ចុប្បន្ន។ កូនប្រុសទាំងពីររបស់គាត់បានសោយរាជ្យអស់រយៈពេលជាងប្រាំបីទសវត្សរ៍ យូរជាងបងប្អូនបង្កើតរបស់ អ៊ិបន៍ សអូត និងបងប្អូនណាយាននៃអាប៊ូដាប៊ី ។ ព្រះអង្គម្ចាស់មហិតល គឺជា​ព្រះរាជបុត្រ​ទី៦៩ របស់​ស្តេចចុល្លាង្ករណ៍ និង​ទី៧ របស់ម្ចាស់ក្សត្រីស្វាងវឌ្ឍនា ។ មាតារបស់ទ្រង់ក៏បានចិញ្ចឹមព្រះអង្គម្ចាស់បួនអង្គផ្សេងទៀត ដែលមាតាធម្មតា ( ចៅចមម៉ាន់ដា ) បានទទួលមរណភាព។ ក្នុងចំណោមនោះមានព្រះអង្គម្ចាស់ រាងសិត ប្រយូរស័ក ក្រោយមក ព្រះអង្គម្ចាស់ជ័យនាថ ដែលបានក្លាយជាមិត្តជិតស្និទ្ធរបស់ព្រះអង្គម្ចាស់មហិតល ក្នុងវ័យកុមារភាព។ ក្រោយមកក្នុងជីវិតរបស់ពួកគេ ព្រះអង្គម្ចាស់រាងសិត នឹងដើរតួយ៉ាងសំខាន់ក្នុងអាជីពរបស់មហិតល ហើយក្រោយមកត្រូវបានតែងតាំងជារាជានុសិទ្ធិសម្រាប់កូនប្រុសម្នាក់របស់មហិតល គឺ ភូមិពលអតុល្យតេជ ។ ឯកសារយោង
__label__km ក្បាច់ភ្ញីភ្លើងជាក្បាច់ប្រើក្នុងពិធីបុណ្យផ្សេងៗក្នុងសាសនា បុណ្យ ប្រពៃណី ព្រោះក្បាច់នេះមានលក្ខណៈដុចអណ្តាតភ្លើង ដែលជាគ្រឿងសក្ការៈបូជា និងប្រទីបបំភ្លឺទៅកាន់សុគតិភព ឬប្រើក្នុងពិធីសាសនាជាដើម។ វាមានលក្ខណៈងាយស្រួលធ្វើបានយ៉ាងឆាប់រហ័ស ដូចជាឆ្លាក់លើស្រទបចេក កាត់ក្រដាស ឬចោះធ្វើពុម្ព។
__label__km សមីការតូរីចេល្លី(Torricelli's equation)គឺជាសមីការដែលបង្កើតឡើងដោយលោក អ៊ីវិនចឺលីស្តា តូរីចេល្លី(Evangelista Torricelli)​ ដើម្បីកំនត់ល្បឿន​ចុងក្រោយនៃ​អង្គធាតុ​ដែល​ផ្លាស់ទី​ដោយ​សំទុះថេរ និង​មិន​មានចន្លោះពេលដែលត្រូវដឹង ។ សមីការគឺ ដេរីវេ យើងមានសមីការល្បឿន លើកអង្គទាំងពីរជាការេ គេបាន តួអាចទាញពីសមីការចលនា (ឬ យើងអាចប្រើ រូបមន្ត ​​​ ) ជំនួសវាចូលទៅក្នុងសមីការខាងលើ គេបាន រូបវិទ្យា សមីការ មេកានិច
__label__km ខេត្ត កាវបាង( [kāːw ɓàŋ] ( ) គឺជា ខេត្ត មួយនៃ ភូមិភាគឦសាន នៃ ប្រទេសវៀតណាម ។ ខេត្តនេះមានព្រំប្រទល់ជាប់ជាមួយ ខេត្ត ហាយ៉ាង, ខេត្ត ទ្វៀនក្វាង, ខេត្ត បាកកាន និង ខេត្ត ឡាំងសឺន ក្នុងប្រទេសវៀតណាម។ វាក៏មានព្រំដែនអន្តរជាតិរួមជាមួយ ខេត្ត ក្វាងស៊ី ក្នុង ប្រទេសចិន ផងដែរ។ ខេត្តនេះមានផ្ទៃដី 6,724.6 គីឡូម៉ែត្រការ៉េ ហើយគិតត្រឹមឆ្នាំ 2019 ចំនួនប្រជាជនរបស់វាគឺ 530,341 នាក់។ ឯកសារយោង
__label__km ម៉ូលេគុលជីវភាព (, ) មានន័យថា ម៉ូលេគុលណាមួយដែលបានសំយោគដោយសារពាង្គកាយ រួមទាំងម៉ាក្រូម៉ូលេគុលដែលមានទំហំធំ ដូចជា ប្រូតេអ៊ីន ប៉ូលីសាការីត លីពីត និងអាស៊ីតនុយក្លេអ៊ិច និងម៉ូលេគុលដែលមានទំហំតូច ដូចជា មេតាបូលីត។ ម៉ូលេគុលជីវភាព ជីវគីមីវិទ្យា ម៉ូលេគុល សមាសធាតុសរីរាង្គ
__label__km ស៊ីយ៉ាញួរ (បារាំង៖ Cyanure) គឺជាសមាសធាតុគីមី បន្សំជាមួយរ៉ាឌីកាល់ C≡N គឺអាតូមកាបូនមួយភ្ជាប់ដោយសម្ព័ន្ធបីជាន់ទៅនឹងអាតូមអាសូតមួយ។ ក្រុមនេះត្រូវបានគេស្គាល់ថាជាក្រុមស៊ីយ៉ាណូ(Cyano group)។ ក្រុមស៊ីយ៉ាណូមានវត្តមានជាអាញ៉ុង CN-។ អំបិលសូដ្យូមស៊ីយ៉ាញួរ (NaCN) និងប៉ូតាស្យូមស៊ីយ៉ាញួរ(KCN) គឺពុលខ្លាំង។ អាស៊ីដស៊ីយ៉ានីឌ្រិច (acide cyanhyrique) រូបមន្តគីមី HCN គឺជាអង្គធាតុរាវផលិតក្នុងទ្រង់ទ្រាយឧស្សាហកម្មខ្នាតធំ ដោយការធ្វើអាស៊ីដកម្ម អំបិលស៊ីយ៉ាញួរ។ ក្នុងគីមីសរីរាង្គ ស៊ីយ៉ាញួរជាធម្មតាត្រូវបានគេហៅថានីត្រាត។ ក្រុម CN ត្រូវបានផ្សារភ្ជាប់ដោយសម្ព័ន្តកូវ៉ាឡង់ជាមួយកាបូននៃធាតុគីមីសរីរាង្គ។ ឧទាហរណ៍នៅក្នុងនីញ៉ូមអាសេតាត ក្រុមស៊ីយ៉ាណូត្រូវបានផ្សារភ្ជាប់ទៅនឹងមេទីល (CH3) ។ ដោយសារពួកវាមិនបញ្ចេញអ៊ីយ៉ុងសូដ្យូមនីត្រាត ជាទូទៅវាមានជាតិពុលតិចជាងអំបិលស៊ីយ៉ាញួរ។
__label__km អំបូរភាសាក្រា-ដៃ​ ឬ​ តៃកាដៃ គឺជាអំបូរភាសាមួយដ៏ធំដែលស្ថិតនៅអាស៊ីអាគ្នេយ៍ដីគោក ប្រទេសចិនខាងត្បូង និងប្រទេសឥណ្ឌាភាគឦសាន។​ ភាសានៅក្នុងអំបូរនេះសុទ្ធតែជាភាសាដែលប្រើស្នៀងដើម្បីផ្ដូរអត្ថន័យរបស់ពាក្យនីមួយៗ។ នៅក្នុងអំបូរភាសានេះ មានភាសាថៃនិងឡាវដែលត្រូវបានប្រើជាភាសាផ្លូវការថ្នាក់ជាតិ។​ សរុបមក ភាសានៅក្នុងអំបូរនេះត្រូវបាននិយាយដោយប្រមាណ ៩៣ លាននាក់​ ៦០% ជានាក់និយាយភាសាថៃ​។​ ​ Ethnologue បានកំណត់ថាមាន ៩៥ ភាសានៅក្នុងអំបូរក្រា-ដៃ ដែលក្នុងនោះមាន ៦២ នៅក្នុងអំបូរតៃ។ References
__label__km ខេត្តហាទិញ គឺជាខេត្តមួយនៅឆ្នេរសមុទ្រភាគកណ្តាលនៃប្រទេសវៀតណាម ។ រួមជាមួយនឹងខេត្តងេះអាន ដែលនៅជិតខាងខេត្តទាំងពីរត្រូវបានរួមគ្នាហៅថា " ងេះទិញ " ហើយអ្នកស្រុកត្រូវបានគេស្គាល់ថានិយាយភាសាវៀតណាមជាមួយនឹងការបញ្ចេញសំឡេងក្នុងតំបន់គួរឱ្យកត់សម្គាល់។ ខេត្តហាទិញ ស្ថិតនៅភាគខាងជើងនៃភាគកណ្តាលប្រទេសវៀតណាមប្រហែល៣៤០ គីឡូម៉ែត្រ (២១១ ម៉ាយ) ភាគខាងត្បូងនៃទីក្រុងហាណូយ មានព្រំប្រទល់ជាប់ខេត្តងេះអាន នៅភាគខាងជើងខេត្ត ក្វាងប៊ិញនៅភាគខាងត្បូង ប្រទេសឡាវនៅខាងលិច និង សមុទ្រចិនខាងត្បូងនៅខាងកើត។ សីតុណ្ហភាពខ្ពស់បំផុតមិនធ្លាប់មានរបស់វៀតណាមគឺ ៤៣.៤ អង្សាសេ (១១០ ហ្វារិនហៃ) ត្រូវបានកត់ត្រានៅក្នុងខេត្តក្នុងឆ្នាំ២០១៩ ។ ឯកសារយោង
__label__km () ស្ថិតនៅក្នុង ស្រុកកំពង់ស្វាយ ខេត្តកំពង់ធំ មាន ភូមិ÷ East ឃុំ ត្បែងក្រពើ ស្រុកស្ទឹងសែន West ឃុំ ដំរីជាន់ខ្លា ស្រុកស្ទឹងសែន South ឃុំ ត្បូងក្រពើ ឃុំ ស្រយ៉ូវ ស្រុកស្ទឹងសែន North ឃុំ អាចារ្យលាក់ ស្រុកស្ទឹងសែន និង ឃុំ ត្រពាំងឫស្សី ឃុំ កំពង់ស្វាយ ស្រុកកំពង់ស្វាយ List of village Code Khmer English Reference Note 1 06021101 ព្រៃគុយ Prey Kuy លេខប្រកាស ៤៩៣ ប្រ.ក 2 06021102 អន្លង់លោក Anlong Louk លេខប្រកាស ៤៩៣ ប្រ.ក 3 06021103 សំបួរ Sambuor លេខប្រកាស ៤៩៣ ប្រ.ក 4 06021104 បិណ្ដី Bendei លេខប្រកាស ៤៩៣ ប្រ.ក 5 06021105 ព្រេន Pren លេខប្រកាស ៤៩៣ ប្រ.ក 6 06021106 កំពង់ក្របី Kampong Krabei លេខប្រកាស ៤៩៣ ប្រ.ក 7 06021107 ស្វាយឃ្លោក Svay Khlouk លេខប្រកាស ៤៩៣ ប្រ.ក 8 06021108 ព្រៃគុយ ក Prey Kuy Ka ព្រំប្រទល់នៃ
__label__km ក្នុង​គណិតវិទ្យា វិសមភាព​ហាតវីហ្គឺ​ហ្វីនស្លឺ (Hadwiger–Finsler inequality) គឺជា​លទ្ធផល​ធរណីមាត្រ​នៃ​ត្រីកោណ​ក្នុង​ប្លង់អឺគ្លីត​ ដែល​ត្រូវ​បាន​គេ​ហៅដោយយក​ឈ្មោះ​តាម​គណិតវិទូ​ ហុហ្គោ ហាតវីហ្គឺ (Hugo Hadwiger) និង ប៉ូល ហ្វីនស្លឺ (Paul Finsler) ។ ពំនោល​វិសមភាព ប្រសិនបើ​ត្រីកោណ​មួយ​ក្នុង​ប្លង់​មាន​រង្វាស់​ជ្រុង a; b និង c និង​មាន​ក្រលាផ្ទៃ នោះ​គេ​បាន វិសមភាពវេតស្សឹនបុក (Weitzenböck's inequality ) គឺ​កូរ៉ូលែរ​​នឹង​វិសមភាព​នេះ​៖ ប្រសិនបើ​ត្រីកោណ​មួយ​ក្នុង​ប្លង់មាន​​រង្វាស់​ជ្រុង​ a; b និង c និង​ក្រលាផ្ទៃ S នោះ​គេ​បាន ហាតវីហ្គឺហ្វីនស្លឺ ត្រីកោណ ធរណីមាត្រ
__label__km សីលធម៌ និងតម្លៃមនុស្ស សំដៅយកការប្រតិបត្តិអំពើសុចរិតតាមគន្លងធម៌ អាកប្បកិរិយា សមរម្យដែលសង្គមទទួលស្គាល់ ។ ដូចនេះមនុស្សត្រូវមានសីលធម៌ ចរិយាធម៌ សុជីវធម៌ គោរពច្បាប់ ប្រកាន់ខ្ជាប់អ្វីជាកុសល ដើម្បីរួមរស់ក្នុងសង្គមមួយប្រកបដោយសុវត្ថិភាព និងវឌ្ឍនភាព ។ និយមន័យ សីលធម៌សម្គាល់នូវទ្រឹស្តីទាំងឡាយណា ដែលនាំឱ្យមនុស្សប្រព្រឹត្តតែអំពើល្អ ឬដំបូន្មានទាំងឡាយណា ដែលនាំឱ្យចៀសវាងអំពើអាក្រក់។ សីលធម៌ជាមនសិការក្រមច្បាប់វប្បធម៌នៃសកម្មភាពសង្គម ដែលជ្រៀបចូលទៅក្នុងបុគ្គលម្នាក់ៗ ។ ទស្សនវិទូជាច្រើនបានធ្វើអំណះអំណាងថា ជីវិតរស់នៅល្អជាជីវិត ដែលមានសីលធម៌ ។ មាគ៌ាដ៏ល្អបំផុតសម្រាប់ការរស់នៅគឺ ការចេះទាក់ទងគ្នារវាងអ្នកដទៃ និងខ្លួនឯងប្រកបដោយសីលធម៌ ។ ដោយហេតុថា មានទ្រឹស្តីជាច្រើនស្តីអំពីអ្វី ដែលហៅថាសីលធម៌ពិតប្រាកដនោះ ធ្វើឱ្យមានការយល់ឃើញផ្សេងៗពីគ្នាអំពីអ្វី ដែលទាក់ទងទៅនឹងមាគា៌ដ៏ល្អបំផុតសម្រាប់ការរស់នៅ ។ ការរស់នៅប្រកបដោយសីលធម៌ មានសារប្រយោជន៍ដូចជា រស់នៅប្រកបដោយសីលធម៌នាំឱ្យបុគ្គលនោះពេញចិត្តជាខ្លាំងចំពោះអំពើដ៏ល្អរបស់ខ្លួន និងនាំឱ្យគេប្រព្រឹត្តចំពោះអ្នកដទៃយ៉ាងសមរម្យ ។ ការរស់នៅប្រកបដោយសីលធម៌ជាមាគ៌ាដ៏ត្រឹមត្រូវសម្រាប់ជីវិតរស់នៅរបស់មនុស្សម្នាក់ៗ ។ សីលធម៌មានសារៈសំខាន់ និងមានតម្លៃសម្រាប់បុគ្គល និងសង្គម ។ ការរស់នៅរបស់មនុស្សនៅក្នុងសង្គម បានជំរុញឱ្យមនុស្សឱ្យស្វែងរកគោលការណ៍អ្វីមួយសម្រាប់ការអនុវត្ត។ ឯកសារយោង
__label__km ទូរទស្សន៍ក្រុងភ្នំពេញប៉ុស្តិ៍លេខ៣ ជាទូរទស្សន៍របស់ ប្រទេសកម្ពុជា ។ ទីស្នាក់ការកណ្តាល មានទីតាំងស្ថិតនៅក្នុងរាជធានីភ្នំពេញប្រទេសកម្ពុជា ។ ប៉ុស្តិ៍នេះត្រូវបានបង្កើតឡើងក្នុងឆ្នាំ 1996 ។ ម្ចាស់ឆានែលគឺជារដ្ឋបាលក្រុងភ្នំពេញ។ ឯកសារយោង ទូរទស្សន៍កម្ពុជា
__label__km ការសិក្សាស្នាដៃអក្សរសិល្ប៍គឺជាការសិក្សាពីទំនៀមទម្លាប់ប្រពៃណីជំនឿនិងរឿងរ៉ាវផ្សេងៗនៃសង្គម សំណេរកថាខណ្ឌ តែងសេចក្ដីខ្នាតតូច។ សំណេរបែបនេះមិនត្រូវសរសេរវែងពេក រឺ ខ្លីពេកនោះទេ។ ត្រូវសរសេរត្រឹមតែពី ២៥ ល្បះ ទៅ ៣០ ល្បះ។​ ល្បះផ្ដើមសេចក្ដី (សេចក្ដីផ្ដើម), ល្បះគាំទ្រច្រើន (តួសេចក្ដី), ល្បះបញ្ចប់សេចក្ដី (សេចក្ដីបញ្ចប់)។ សំណេរតែងសេចក្ដីប្រៀបធៀប ធាតុរបស់បញ្ជីផ្ដើមដោយលេខរៀង ការអប់រំគឺជាសិទ្ធសេរីភាពដែលធ្វើអោយមនុស្សសម្រេចក្នុងជីវិត
__label__km ​ហេដ្ឋា​រចនា​សម្ព័ន្ធ​ គឹជាពាក្យបច្ចេកទេសមួយ ដែលប្រើសម្រាប់រៀបរាប់អំពី មធ្យោបាយ ក៏ដូចជាគ្រឿងប្រដាប់សំរាប់ ផ្គត់ផ្គង់ជីវភាពរស់នៅសម័យទំនើប របស់មនុស្សយើង។ These are the main items: បណ្តាញទឹក, sewage plants, គេហដ្ឋាន, ផ្លូវថ្នល់, បណ្តាញខ្សែកាប, ការផ្គត់ផ្គង់ស្បៀងអាហារ, សាលារៀន, មន្ទីរពេទ្យ, ព្រលានយន្ដហោះ, ទីជួបជុំសាធារណៈ, អាគាររដ្ឋាភិបាល និងពាណិជ្ជកម្ម, ស្ពាន, ផ្លូវដែក. In fact, everything that modern life needs in the way of built facilities. ហេដ្ឋារចនាសម្ព័ន្ធមានទំនាក់ទំនងយ៉ាងជិតស្និទ្ធជាមួយ ស្តង់ដារនៃការរស់នៅ និងចំនួនប្រជាជនដ៏ច្រើនលើសលប់។ គ្រប់ពេលចំនួនប្រជាជនកើនទ្វេ រចនាសម្ព័ន្ធក៏ត្រូវ ការកើនឡើងទ្វែដងដូចគ្នាដែរ ឫអាចលើសពីនេះ។ ប្រសិនបើប្រទេសនោះជាប្រទេសក្រីក្រ ហើយមានចំនួនប្រជាជនខ្ពស់ រដ្ឋាភិបាលនឹងមិនអាចផ្តល់នូវតម្រូវការ នៃរចនាសម្ព័ន្ធគ្រប់គ្រាន់នោះទេ។ ស្ដង់ដារនៃការរស់នៅនឹងធ្លាក់ចុះ ហើយអាចមានហានិភយ័ខ្ពស់ជាងនេះ។ សំណង់ស៊ីវិល សំណង់ ស្ថាបត្យកម្ម ផែនការ
__label__km នាងចំប៉ាមាស ( ) ជា​ខ្សែវណ្ណកម្មភាពយន្ត​ខ្មែរ​ឆ្នាំ​១៩៧០ ដែល​ដឹកនាំ​ដោយសម្តែងដោយលោក ​សារ៉ាវុធ និង​សម្តែង​ដោយតារាល្បីៗដូចជា វណ្ណ វណ្ណៈ និង ​វិជ្ជរ៉ា ដានី ។ តារាសម្តែង វណ្ណ វណ្ណៈ វិជ្ជរ៉ា ដានី គីម ណូវ៉ា ឯកសារយោង ភាពយន្តខ្មែរ
__label__km ប្រាសាទខាវណយ ស្ថិតនៅលេីភ្នំខាវណយដែលមានកំពស់១៣០ម ក្នុងប្រទេសថៃឡងដ៍សព្វថ្ងៃ។ ប្រាសាទនេះមានតួប៉មបី ប៉ុន្តែសព្វថ្ងៃនៅតែតួកណ្ដាលមួយទេ។ គេរកឃេីញផ្ដែរទ្វារ ធ្វេីពីថ្មភក់ដែលមានលំអនៅរចនាបថសម្បូណ៌ព្រៃគុក (ស.វទី៧)។ តឹតតាងនេះអាចបង្ហាញឲ្យយេីងដឹងថានៅតំបន់នេះមានទំនាក់ទនងជាមួយតំបន់នៅសម្បូណ៌ព្រៃគុក ខេត្តកំពង់ធំសព្វថ្ងៃ។ ជាប្រាសាទខ្មែរចំណាស់ជាងគេបំផុតដែលមានកាលបរិច្ឆេទតាំងពីសតវត្សទី៧ និងទី៨ បើតាមទំរង់ក្បាច់ផ្តែរទាំងពីរដែយយើងបានប្រទះឃើញនៅក្បែរប្រាសាទនេះ .សូមបញ្ជាក់ថា, ប្រាសាទនេះស្ថិតនៅក្នុងភូមិខ្លងណាមសៃ ស្រុកអារាញ់, ខេត្តស្រះកែវ, ប្រទេសថៃសព្វថ្ងៃនេះ ហើយវាស្ថិតនៅភាគនិរតីនៃទីក្រុងប៉ោយប៉ែត ប្រហែល៣០គម។ រូបភាពតូច ខាវណយ
__label__km រ៉ានី ខែមពេន ( កើតថ្ងៃទី 24 ខែធ្នូ ឆ្នាំ 1989) ឬមានឈ្មោះហៅក្រៅថា បេល្លា ឬ បេឡា (เบลล่า) គឺជាតារាសម្តែងនិងជាតារាម៉ូដែលថៃ។ នាងត្រូវបានគេស្គាល់ច្បាស់តាមរយៈតួនាទីរបស់នាងនៅក្នុងរឿងភាគទូរទស្សន៍ជាច្រើននៅលើប៉ុស្តិ៍លេខ៣ របស់ប្រទេសថៃ។ នាងកើត​ក្នុង​ឪពុក​ជនជាតិ​អង់គ្លេស និង​ម្តាយ​ជា​ជនជាតិ​ថៃ។ នាង​ត្រូវ​បាន​គេ​ដាក់​ឈ្មោះ​តាម​ជីដូន​ជីតា​របស់​នាង បេល្លា ខែមពេន។ នាងបានបញ្ចប់ថ្នាក់អនុវិទ្យាល័យពីសាលាសារៈវិទ្យា ។ នាងបានបញ្ចប់ថ្នាក់បរិញ្ញាបត្រផ្នែកសារព័ត៌មាន និងសារគមនាគមន៍ពី សកលវិទ្យាល័យធម្មសាស្ត្រ ហើយមកដល់ឆ្នាំ ២០១៥ នាងកំពុងបន្តការសិក្សាថ្នាក់អនុបណ្ឌិតនៅសកលវិទ្យាល័យដដែល។ ឯកសារយោង បុគ្គលនៅរស់ Articles containing Thai-language text
__label__km ឆាត់ជាតិ សិទ្ធិផាន់ ( , RTGS ៖ Chatchat Sitthiphan, ; កើត​ថ្ងៃ​ទី ២៤ ខែ​ឧសភា ឆ្នាំ ១៩៦៦) គឺ​ជា​អ្នក​នយោបាយ​ថៃ វិស្វករ និង​សាស្ត្រាចារ្យ​ដែល​កាន់​អំណាច​ជា ​អភិបាល​ក្រុង​បាងកក ។ លោកធ្លាប់ជារដ្ឋមន្ត្រីក្រសួងដឹកជញ្ជូន ពីឆ្នាំ២០១២ ដល់ ២០១៤។ ឯកសារយោង បុគ្គលនៅរស់
__label__km ម៉ឺនកែវ ជាដំរីជំនិះនៃឧកញ៉ាអធិរាជវង្សា កាលក្នុងសង្គ្រាមនៅវាលព្រះម្លូ បង្ក្រាបប្រាបប្រាមព្រះឱកញាឱង។ កាលណោះឆ្នាំ ១៥៣៦ ដែលគេបានរំលឹកក្នុងពង្សាវតារខ្មែរ។ ឯកសារយោង ឯកសារមហាបុរសខ្មែរ ដំរីផ្ទាល់ខ្លួនដំរីសឹកសម័យលង្វែក
__label__km តួប៉មទន្លេបិទស្ថិតនៅត្រើយខាងកើតទន្លេមេគង្គ ខាងឆ្វេងដៃនៃស្ពានគីហ្សូណា។ តួប៉មនេះចាប់ផ្តើមកសាងតាំងពីជំនាន់អាណានិគមនិយមបារាំង ដោយធ្វើអំពីឥដ្ឋតាន់ អស់រយៈពេលចំនួន២ឆ្នាំទើបបានហើយជាស្ថាពរ។ ក្នុងសាងសង់បារាំងបានបញ្ចូនអ្នកទោសខ្មែរមួយចំនួនពីកំពង់ចាម ដើម្បីមកជួយការសាងសង់។ តួប៉មមានកំពស់៣៨ម៉ែត្របាទក្រោមមានរាងចតុកោណកែង មានបណ្តោយប្រវែង៩ម៉ែត្រនិងមានទទឹងប្រវែង៧.៥០ម៉ែត្រ ហើយមានទ្វារសម្រាប់ចេញចូលចំនួនពីរគឺខាងកើតមួយនិងខាងលិចមួយ។ បុព្វហេតុនៃការសាងសង់តួប៉មនេះ តាមចម្លើយរបស់អ្នកស្រុកដែលមានវ័យចំណាស់មួយចំនួនបានបញ្ជាក់អះអាងថា ការដែលបារាំងកសាងតួប៉មនេះឡើងគឺដើម្បីរក្សាសន្តិសុខនៅទីកន្លែនោះហើយក៏ជាកន្លែងសម្រាប់ឃ្លាំមើលក្រែងកម្មករ ឬអ្នកស្រុកលួចដឹកជ័រកៅស៊ូយកទៅឱ្យឈួញក្រៅ។ ឯកសារយោង
__label__km (បា.; សំ. ស្ថវិរវាទ) ពាក្យរបស់ព្រះថេរៈឬពាក្យដែលព្រះថេរៈនិយាយ ។ ព្រះត្រៃបិដកជាពុទ្ធវចនៈ ដែលព្រះថេរៈជាអរហន្តទាំងឡាយលោកបានលើកសង្គាយនា រៀបរៀងទុកឲ្យនៅទៀងទាត់តាមភាសិតរបស់ព្រះសម្មាសម្ពុទ្ធមិនឲ្យឃ្លៀងឃ្លាតក៏ហៅថា ថេរវាទ ដែរ លោកអ្នកប្រព្រឹត្តកាន់តាមថេរវាទ គឺលោកដែលប្រព្រឹត្តកាន់តាមលំអានសេចក្ដីក្នុងព្រះត្រៃបិដក ។ ព. ផ្ទ. អាចរិយវាទ ។ ដោយ Today-Cambodia
__label__km យ៉ាបយុម ( ) នៃភាសាទីបេអត្ថន័យ គឺ ឪពុកនិងម្តាយ។. , វាជានិមិត្តរូបនៃបុរសនិងស្ត្រីក្នុងព្រះពុទ្ធសាសនានិកាយវិជ្រយាននិកាយត័នត្រៈ ៕៚ .។ កំណត់ មើលផងដែរ សាសនាអ្នកស្រុកចិន ​ អ៉ីហ្វួងទី បព្វជិតសាសនាតៅ លោកយាយម៉ៅ ប្រភព​អ្នកតា​ក្នុង​សង្គម​ខ្មែរ សាសនាខ្មោច ព្រះម៉ែនាង​បក់ ព្រះម៉ែជំនាងទូក ព្រះមេស្រូវ ព្រះភូមិទេវតា រានទេវតា ព្រះមហាជ័យពៃរស្រព រុក្ខទេវតា យ័ន្ត ឃុនឆាង ឃុនផែន នាងភឹម តួអង្គនៅក្នុងរឿងរាមកេរ្តិ៍ខ្មែរ តួអង្គនៅក្នុងរឿងឃុនឆាង ឃុនផែន ព្រះរាជពិធីត្រីយម្ពវាយ ត្រីបវាយ ព្រះម៉ែស៊ីវ៉ាងម៉ូ ព្រះសិវៈនាដរាជ បូជនីយដ្ឋាន​ដែនកោះ​លង្កា កួន អ៊ី អរុណមិកុល ស្រីមហាមារីអ័ម័ន កូយិល(ទីក្រុងព្រៃនគរ) មីនាឈី សុនទរេសូរ មនឌៀរ សក្តិនិកាយ ព្រះក័តតាវះរាយ័ន ព្រះម៉ែប៉្ររិយាចី ភារតៈនាដយ័ម វត្តព្រះស្រីមហាអុម៉ាទេវី ទេវស្ថានក្រុងបាងកក យមុណូត្រី គ័ងគូត្រី ព្រះម៉ែពះហុឆរា ព្រះម៉ែកូទិយារ៍ នគរបី (សាមកុក) ពិធីហែអ្នកតា សាមកុក តាណទាវះ សាសនប្រវត្តិ
__label__km "Burger King" គឺជាភ្នាក់ងារអាហារអន្ដរជាតិអន្តរជាតិដែលលក់ដាច់។ ហាងដែលបានបើកដំបូងរបស់ខ្លួន 1954, មីលីយ៉ក, រដ្ឋផ្លរីដា ។ មួយនៃពិភពលោកទាំងមូលរបស់លោក Burger ឯកទេសសំណព្វរបស់ស្តេចគឺ Hamburger ដែលគេហៅថា "Whopper" ។ នៅពេលដែលក្រុមហ៊ុន Burger King សម្រេចចិត្តពង្រីកការងាររបស់ខ្លួននៅក្នុងប្រទេសអូស្ត្រាលីពួកគេដឹងថាអាជីវកម្មរបស់ពួកគេត្រូវបានចុះបញ្ជីរួចហើយដោយអ្នករត់ហាងម្ហូបអាហារតូចមួយ។ ការពិតសិទ្ធិផ្តាច់មុខដំបូងរបស់អូស្រ្តាលីក្នុងការបង្កើតក្រុមហ៊ុន Burger King ត្រូវបានគេដាក់ឈ្មោះមិនត្រឹមត្រូវថា "Matelaina Jack" ដែលបានប្តូរឈ្មោះជាឈ្មោះនិងអារម្មណ៍នៃសិទ្ធិផ្តាច់មុខ។ Jack Cowin ។ ត្រូវប្រាកដថា Jack លក់ប្រភេទហាមហឺបច្ចុប្បន្នក៏ដូចជាអ្នកឯកទេសជនជាតិអូស្ត្រាលីម្នាក់គឺ Burger Aussie ។ ប៊ឺហ្គ័រនេះត្រូវបានផ្អែកលើរសជាតិត្រីនិងម៉ាស្សារបស់អូស្រ្តាលីរួមទាំងស៊ុតប៊ីកុនខ្ទឹមបារាំងនិង beetroot និងសាច់ទឹកជ្រលក់និងប៉េងប៉ោះ។ អាហារទាន់ចិត្ត
__label__km រដ្ឋបាល ឃុំកញ្ជរ មាន ១២ ភូមិ កញ្ជរ បឹងក្រាញ់ ផ្លូវលួង សំរោង ព្រែកប្របែក ទួលទទឹង ត្បែងប្រគាប ពោធិ៍អណ្ដែត កូនក្រាយ ដងអូរ រលាំង កណ្តាល ព្រំប្រទល់ អប់រំ បឋមសិក្សា អនុវិទ្យាល័យ សាសនា ព្រះពុទ្ធសាសនា វត្ត ផ្សារ រមណីដ្ឋាន មើលផងដែរ ខេត្តពោធិ៍សាត់
__label__km ដាំងធិ ង៉កធិញ (កើតថ្ងៃទី 25 ខែធ្នូ ឆ្នាំ 1959) គឺជាអ្នកនយោបាយវៀតណាម ដែលបានបម្រើការជា អនុប្រធានាធិបតីវៀតណាម ពីឆ្នាំ 2016 ដល់ឆ្នាំ 2021 និងរយៈពេលខ្លីជា ប្រធានាធិបតីស្តីទីវៀតណាម ក្នុងឆ្នាំ 2018 ។ នាង​ជា​ស្ត្រី​ដំបូង​គេ​ក្នុង​ប្រវត្តិសាស្ត្រ​វៀតណាម​ដែល​កាន់​តំណែង​ប្រធានាធិបតី​វៀតណាម និង​ជា​ប្រមុខរដ្ឋ​ស្ត្រី​ដំបូង​គេ​ក្នុង​ប្រទេស​កុម្មុយនិស្ត​ចាប់​តាំង​ពី សូង ជីងលីង នៃ ​ប្រទេស​ចិន ។ ឯកសារយោង ប្រធានាធិបតីវៀតណាម បុគ្គលនៅរស់
__label__km គិដាវពេជ្រ នូហួង ( ១ កក្កដា ១៩៧២ - ២៤ មេសា ២០២០) ជាអ្នកចម្រៀងប្រុសប្រជាជនឡាវ គាត់បានចូលប្រឡូកក្នុងវិស័យចម្រៀងជាអ្នកចំរៀងនៅឆ្នាំ ១៩៩៥ ថ្ងៃទី ២៤ ខែមេសា ឆ្នាំ ២០២០ គាត់បានស្លាប់ដោយសារខ្សោយតំរងនោម នៅអាយុ ៤៧ ឆ្នាំ Discography អាល់ប៊ុម Sao Se Bang Fai (ສາວເຊບັ້ງໄຟ) Jee Hoy (ຈີ່ຫອຍ) Sao Mak Nao bao Na Wang (ສາວຫມາກນາວ ບ່າວນາວາງ) (Ft. ភឹង រស្មី) Diao Ai Kor Tham Jai Dai (ດຽ໋ວອ້າຍກັທຳໃຈໄດ້) (Ft. ប៉្រាង បុប្ផា) ឯកសារយោង អ្នកចម្រៀងឡាវ
__label__km ព្រះទេវី ( , ) គឺជាទេវតាទេពភេទស្ត្រីរក្សាពិភពលោកក្នុង​នៅសកលលោកនៃព្រហ្មញ្ញ សាសនា ហិណ្ឌូសាសនា ព្រះវេទ។. កំណត់ មើលផងដែរ សាសនាអ្នកស្រុកចិន ​ អ៉ីហ្វួងទី បព្វជិតសាសនាតៅ លោកយាយម៉ៅ ប្រភព​អ្នកតា​ក្នុង​សង្គម​ខ្មែរ សាសនាខ្មោច ព្រះម៉ែនាង​បក់ ព្រះម៉ែជំនាងទូក ព្រះមេស្រូវ ព្រះភូមិទេវតា រានទេវតា ព្រះមហាជ័យពៃរស្រព រុក្ខទេវតា យ័ន្ត ឃុនឆាង ឃុនផែន នាងភឹម តួអង្គនៅក្នុងរឿងរាមកេរ្តិ៍ខ្មែរ តួអង្គនៅក្នុងរឿងឃុនឆាង ឃុនផែន ព្រះរាជពិធីត្រីយម្ពវាយ ត្រីបវាយ ព្រះម៉ែស៊ីវ៉ាងម៉ូ ព្រះសិវៈនាដរាជ បូជនីយដ្ឋាន​ដែនកោះ​លង្កា យ៉ាបយ៉ុម អរុណមិកុល ស្រីមហាមារីអ័ម័ន កូយិល(ទីក្រុងព្រៃនគរ) មីនាឈី សុនទរេសូរ មនឌៀរ សក្តិនិកាយ ព្រះក័តតាវះរាយ័ន ព្រះម៉ែប៉្ររិយាចី ភារតៈនាដយ័ម វត្តព្រះស្រីមហាអុម៉ាទេវី ទេវស្ថានក្រុងបាងកក យមុណូត្រី គ័ងគូត្រី ព្រះម៉ែពះហុឆរា ព្រះម៉ែកូទិយារ៍
__label__km រូបភាពតូច ស្ថានីយស្រែអំពិលមានទីតាំងនៅស្ថិតក្នុងភូមិស្រែអំពិល ឃុំឈើទាល ស្រុកកៀនស្វាយ ខេត្តកណ្ដាល។ ការធ្វើកំណាយស្រាវជ្រាវនៅស្ថានីយស្រែអំពិល ជាក់ស្តែងបានរកឃើញថាមានភស្ដុតាងមួយចំនួន ដែលបង្ហាញនៅទីតាំងកំណាយមាន រចនាសម្ព័ន្ធសំណង់ឥដ្ឋសង់តម្រៀបគ្នាជាជួរៗ មានរាងចតុកោណកែងដែលតម្រៀបតាមទិសកើតលិច (ប្រវែង៤,៥ម៉ែត្រ) និងទិសជើងត្បូង (ប្រវែង៤ម៉ែត្រ)។ ចំណែកនៅចំកណ្ដាលមានប្រហោងចំហរដែលលក្ខណៈនេះអាចបញ្ជាក់បានថាទីនេះអាចជាអតីតប្រាសាទឥដ្ឋដែលជាផ្នែកខាងក្នុងនៃប្រាសាទ។រីឯឥដ្ឋដែលមានក្នុងរចនាសម្ព័ន្ធគឺអាចជាជញ្ជាំងប្រាសាទ។ ក្រុមកំណាយស្រាវជ្រាវអាចសន្និដ្ឋានជាបឋមថា ទីតាំងនេះគឺជាប្រាសាទសង់ពីឥដ្ឋ ដែលបានសង់ឡើងនៅកំឡុងសតវត្សរ៍ទី៦-៧នៃគ្រិស្គសករាជ ដែលស្ថិតនៅក្នុងសម័យមុនអង្គរ។ ចំពោះលទ្ធផលកំណាយទាំងស្រុងនឹងបង្ហាញច្បាស់លាស់បន្ទាប់ពីបញ្ចប់ការងារកំណាយស្រាវជ្រាវ។ នេះជាការបញ្ជាក់ពីក្រុមការងារស្រាវជ្រាវនៃរាជបណ្ឌិត្យសភាកម្ពុជា ដែលបានចុះទៅត្រួតពិនិត្យការងារកំណាយដោយផ្ទាល់កាលពីព្រឹកថ្ងៃសុក្រ ៦រោច ខែពិសាខ ឆ្នាំកុរ ឯកស័ក ព.ស. ២៥៦៣ ត្រូវនឹងថ្ងៃទី២៤ ខែឧសភា ឆ្នាំ២០១៩។ ឯកសារយោង ខេត្តកណ្តាល
__label__km ភូមិព្រៃស្រឡៅ ស្ថិតនៅភាគខាងត្បូងនៃឃុំត្រពាំងសាលាខាងលិច ក្នុងស្រុកបន្ទាយមាស ខេត្តកំពត ចំងាយប្រហែល២គីឡូម៉ែតពីភូមិទាំងបី ហើយមានផ្លូវចូលតែមួយគត់គឺ តាមថ្នល់គ្រួសស្របតាមថ្នល់រថភ្លើង ដែលមានទិសដៅពីជើងទៅត្បូង។​ ហើយភូមិនេះមានខ្យល់អាកាសបរិសុទ្ទល្អ ទេសភាពវាលស្រលះ សំបូទោដោយស្រូវខៀវស្រងាត់​ប៉ុន្តែភូមិនេះពុំសូវសំបូរមនុស្សរស់នៅប៉ុន្មានទេ​ ព្រោះជាភូមិមួយដែលហ៊ុំព័ទដោយវាលស្រែ គ្មានទឹកគ្រប់គ្រាន់សំរាប់ប្រើប្រាស់ ស្ថិតនៅឆ្ងាយពីផ្សារ ។ ឃុំត្រពាំងសាលាខាងលិច ស្រុកបន្ទាយមាស ខេត្តកំពត
__label__km ពាក្យព្រះពាន់អ្នកនៅតំបន់អង្គរបានហៅតៗគ្នាថា មានការកសាងព្រះពុទ្ធរូបចំនួន ១០០០អង្គនាសម័យកណ្តាល។ ពុទ្ធរូប ដែលប្រជាជនស្គាល់ និងជឿជាក់ថាមានបារមីស័ក្តិសិទ្ធិគឺបដិមា ព្រះនាងចេក និងព្រះនាងចម ដែលសព្វថ្ងៃយកមកតម្កល់ ដើម្បីគោរពបូជានៅក្បែររាជតំណាក់ខេត្តសៀមរាប។ នៅលើសសរស្តម្ភមានសិលាចារឹកសម័យកណ្តាល និងខ្មុកប្រក្ស័ពណ៌ក្រហម ដែលបានលាបពីលើនៅសតវត្សរ៍ទី១២ និងផ្នែកខ្កះនៅសម័យកណ្តាល។ ឯកសារយោង
__label__km ម៉មរាជាវង្ស សេនីយ៍ ប្រាមោជ ( , ; ថ្ងៃទី២៦ ខែឧសភា ឆ្នាំ១៩០៥ – ថ្ងៃទី២៨ ខែកក្កដា ឆ្នាំ១៩៩៧) ជានាយករដ្ឋមន្ត្រីនៃប្រទេសថៃចំនួនបីដង ដែលជាអ្នកនយោបាយនៅក្នុងគណបក្សប្រជាធិបតេយ្យ មេធាវី អ្នកការទូត និង សាស្រ្តាចារ្យ ។ គឺជា​កូនចៅ​នៃរាជវង្សថៃ ទ្រង់​ជា​ចៅទួត​របស់ស្តេចរាមាទី២ ។ អាណត្តិ​ចុងក្រោយ​របស់​លោក​ក្នុង​ពេល​ដែល​នាយករដ្ឋមន្ត្រី​បាន​កាត់​អាណត្តិ​តែ​មួយ​គត់​របស់​ប្អូន​ប្រុស​លោកគឹកឫទ្ធិ៍ប្រាមោជ ។ ជីវប្រវត្តិ កើតជាកូនប្រុសរបស់ព្រះអង្គម្ចាស់ខាំរ៉ប និងម្តាយដែង ( ប៊ុនណាក ) គាត់បានសិក្សានៅ មហាវិទ្យាល័យត្រេន្ត៍ នៅ ដឺប៊ីស័រ មុនពេលទទួលបានសញ្ញាប័ត្រថ្នាក់បរិញ្ញាបត្រកិត្តិយសថ្នាក់ទីពីរផ្នែកនីតិសាស្ត្រ ពី មហាវិទ្យាល័យវ៉ូសស្ទ័រ នៅ អុកហ្វដ ។ លោកបានបន្តការសិក្សារបស់លោកនៅ ហ្គ្រាយស៍អុិន្ត ទីក្រុងឡុងដ៍ ដោយទទួលបានកិត្តិយសដំបូង។ បន្ទាប់ពីត្រឡប់មកប្រទេសថៃវិញ លោកបានសិក្សាច្បាប់ថៃ ហើយបន្ទាប់ពីរយៈពេលប្រាំមួយខែជាសិក្ខាកាមនៅតុលាការកំពូល លោកបានចាប់ផ្តើមធ្វើការនៅតុលាការស៊ីវិលយុត្តិធម៌។ ក្រោយមកគាត់ត្រូវបានផ្ទេរទៅក្រសួងការបរទេស ហើយនៅឆ្នាំ១៩៤០ ត្រូវបានបញ្ជូនទៅ សហរដ្ឋអាមេរិក ជាឯកអគ្គរដ្ឋទូតថៃ។ ឯកសារយោង នាយករដ្ឋមន្ត្រីថៃ
__label__km លោក William "Pudge" លោក Walter Heffelfinger (20 ធ្នូ, 1867 - 2 មេសា 1954) គឺជាកីឡាករបាល់ទាត់អាមេរិកនិងជាគ្រូបង្វឹក។ គាត់ត្រូវបានគេចាត់ទុកថាជាកីឡាករដំបូងគេដែលបានលេងបាល់ទាត់អាជីពដែលត្រូវបានបង់ទៅលេងនៅក្នុងឆ្នាំ 1892 ។
__label__km បាល់ទាត់កញ្ចុំផ្កាយ គឺជារឿងភាគគំនូរជីវចលបារាំង ដែលផលិតរួមគ្នាដោយ អាល់ផ្វានីម បារាំង២ ជេតិខ្សអឺរ៉ុប និង វេលគីន-ជីវចលន៍។ រដូវកាលទីបីមាន ២៦ ភាគ ដែលបានចាក់ផ្សាយនៅអឺរ៉ុបនៅខែ មិថុនា ២០១០។ នៅក្នុងចក្រវាឡនៃ បាល់ទាត់កញ្ចុំផ្កាយ ពិភពដែលមានមនុស្សរស់នៅជាច្រើនក្នុងកញ្ចុំផ្កាយហ៊្សែលលីយ៉ុង ប្រកួតគ្នាក្នុងកីឡាបាល់ទាត់កញ្ចុំផ្កាយ ជាកីឡាមួយដែលស្រដៀងទៅនឹងបាល់ទាត់ដែរ ប៉ុន្តែមានអ្នកលេងតែប្រាំពីរនាក់ទេក្នុងក្រុមម្ខាងៗ។ កីឡានេះស្មុគស្មាញដោយសារការបន្ថែមសន្ទនីយ ដែលជម្រុញឱ្យគុណសម្បត្តិរបស់កីឡាករប្រសើរឡើង ដូចជា ល្បឿន កម្លាំង និង ភាពរវាសរវៃ រឺក៏ ផ្ដល់នូវថាមពលពិសេសដូចជាទូរគមន៍។ សាច់រឿងមានដំណាលតាមវាសនានៃក្រុមបាល់ទាល់កញ្ចុំផ្កាយមួយក្រុមដែលគ្មានបទពិសោធន៍ គឺក្រុម កុមារព្រិល តាមសាច់រឿង ពួកគេមានបំណងប្រាថ្នាចូលប្រកួតយកពានបាល់ទាត់កញ្ចុំផ្កាយ។
__label__km ខេត្តប៊ិញថ្វឹន គឺជាខេត្តមួយរបស់ ប្រទេសវៀតណាម ។ វាមានទីតាំងនៅឆ្នេរកណ្តាលខាងត្បូងរបស់ប្រទេស។ ពេលខ្លះវាត្រូវបានគេមើលឃើញថាជាផ្នែកមួយនៃតំបន់ភាគអាគ្នេយ៍ ។ ខេត្តនេះត្រូវបានគេស្គាល់ដោយសារទេសភាព និងឆ្នេរសមុទ្រ។ វាក៏មានទីតាំងមួយចំនួនដែលមានសារៈសំខាន់ខាងបុរាណវត្ថុផងដែរ។ ប្រវត្តិសាស្ត្រ ភាគច្រើននៃអ្វីដែលឥឡូវនេះគឺខេត្តប៊ិញថ្វឹន គឺជាផ្នែកនៃរដ្ឋចាម នៃបានឌូរ៉ាង៉ា ដែលមានមជ្ឈមណ្ឌលនយោបាយរបស់ខ្លួននៅក្នុងខេត្តនីញថ្វឹងដែលនៅជិតខាង។ វា​គឺ​ជា​នាយក​រដ្ឋ​ឯករាជ្យ​ចុង​ក្រោយ​បន្ទាប់​ពី​ការ​ដួល​រលំ​នៃវិជ័យ ក្នុង​ឆ្នាំ១៤៧១ ។ ក្រោយមកខេត្តប៊ិញថ្វឹន ត្រូវបានបញ្ចូលទៅក្នុងប្រទេសវៀតណាម ខណៈពេលដែលខេត្តនីញថ្វឹន នៅតែឯករាជ្យបានយូររហូតដល់ឆ្នាំ១៨៣២។ មុន​ឆ្នាំ ១៩៧៦ ខេត្តប៊ិញថ្វឹន មាន​ទំហំ​តូច​ជាង​ព្រោះ​ភាគ​ខាង​លិច​ភាគ​ច្រើន​ស្ថិត​ក្នុងខេត្តប៊ិញទុយ ដាច់​ដោយ​ឡែក​ពី​គ្នា​)។ ប៊ិញទុយ, ប៊ិញថ្វឹន និង និញថ្វឹន ត្រូវ​បាន​បញ្ចូល​ចូល​គ្នា​ក្នុង​ឆ្នាំ១៩៧៦ ដើម្បី​បង្កើត ​ខេត្តថ្វឹនហាយ ។ វាត្រូវបានបែងចែកម្តងទៀតទៅជា និញថ្វឹន និង ប៊ិញថ្វឹន ក្នុងឆ្នាំ១៩៩១ ខណៈដែលប៊ិញទុយ នៅតែជាផ្នែកមួយនៃខេត្តប៊ិញថ្វឹន។ ឯកសារយោង
__label__km Layal Abboud (:layāl ʿab'boud;កើតនៅថ្ងៃទី 15 ខែឧសភាឆ្នាំ 1982) គឺជាតារាចម្រៀងប៉ុបលីបង់អ្នកចម្រៀងតន្ត្រីបុរាណកវីនិពន្ធកំណាព្យអ្នករាំរែកប្រគុំតន្រ្តីម៉ូដែលសមរម្យមនុស្សធម៌និងអ្នកជំនួញមូស្លីម. ឯកសារយោង តំណភ្ជាប់ខាងក្រៅ Instagram Layal Abboud on YouTube SoundCloud Layal Abboud on Myspace Layal Abboud on ReverbNation បុគ្គលនៅរស់ អ្នកចម្រៀងលីបង់
__label__km លុយបាត (, ប្រតិចារិក: បាទ, និមិត្តសញ្ញា: ฿, កូដ: THB) គឺជារូបិយប័ណ្ណផ្លូវការរបស់ថៃ ការ​ចេញ​រូបិយប័ណ្ណ​ជា​បន្ទុក​របស់​ធនាគារ​ថៃ នេះ​បើ​តាម Bloomberg ប្រាក់បាតថៃ ជារូបិយប័ណ្ណដែលដំណើរការល្អបំផុតរបស់ពិភពលោកក្នុងឆ្នាំ 2018​ SWIFT គិតត្រឹមខែមករា ឆ្នាំ 2019 បានដាក់ចំណាត់ថ្នាក់ប្រាក់បាតថៃជារូបិយប័ណ្ណទូទាត់ដែលប្រើញឹកញាប់បំផុតទី 10 នៅលើពិភពលោក។ ឯកសារយោង រូបិយប័ណ្ណ
__label__km ប្រាសាទចុងស្រុក​មាន​ទីតាំង​ស្ថិត​នៅ​ក្នុង​ភូមិ​ចុងស្រុក ឃុំចុងស្រុក ស្រុកស៊ីធរកណ្តាល ខេត្តព្រៃវែង មានចម្ងាយ​ប្រហែល ៣៨គ.ម ពីទីរួមខេត្តព្រៃវែង​។ ប្រាសាទ​នេះ​មាន​សភាព​ទ្រុឌ​ទ្រោម បាក់បែក ធ្វើ​ពី​ឥដ្ឋ និង ថ្មភក់ កសាងឡើង​នៅ​សតវត្យរ៍ទី៧។ នៅក្នុង​ប្រាសាទ​គេ​ឃើញ​មាន​សល់​នូវ​រូប​ព្រះ​គោ​មួយ​អង្គ​ធ្វើ​អំពី​ថ្មភក់ ជា​ប្រភេទ​ពោធិសាត់​មួយ​ដ៏​មាន​អំណាច​ខ្លាំង​ពូកែ​នា​សម័យ​កាល​នោះ។ ខេត្តព្រៃវែង
__label__km អង្គការ Room to Read គឺជាអង្គការមិនរកកម្រៃដែលមានបេសកកម្មលើកកម្ពស់អក្ខរកម្ម និងសមភាពយេនឌ័រក្នុងវិស័យអប់រំនៅតាមបណ្ដាប្រទេសកំពុងអភិវឌ្ឍ។ អង្គការនេះមានទីស្នាក់ការនៅ San Francisco, California ដែលត្រូវបានបង្កើតឡើងដោយឈលើជំនឿមួយថា «ពិភពលោកអាចផ្លាស់ប្ដូរបាន ត្រូវចាប់ផ្ដើមជាមួយកុមារដែលទទួលបានការអប់រំ» (World Change Starts With Educated Children)។ អង្គការនេះផ្ដោតសំខាន់ក្នុងការធ្វើកិច្ចសហប្រតិបត្តការជាមួយសហគមន៍មូលដ្ឋាន អង្គការដៃគូនានា និងរដ្ឋាភិបាល។ Room to Read ធ្វើការអភិវឌ្ឍកម្មវិធីលើកស្ទួចជំនាញ-បំនិនអក្ខរកម្ម និងទម្លាប់នៃការអានក្នុងចំណោមកុមារ-សិស្សានុសិស្សកម្រិតបឋមសិក្សា និងគាំទ្រ-ជម្រុញដល់កុមារីសិក្សាបន្តឲ្យចប់ដល់មធ្យមសិក្សា ជាមួយនឹងបំនិនជីវិតគ្រប់គ្រាន់ ដើម្បីធានាជ័យជំនះ ទាំងក្នុងសាលា និងជិវិតនាពេលអនាគត។ អង្គការ Room to Read មានប្រតិបត្តការនៅក្នុងប្រទេសចំនួន១០ ក្នុងទ្វីបអាសុី និងអាហ្វ្រិក រួមមាន៖ South Africa, Zambia, Tanzania, ស្រីលង្កា, ឥណ្ឌា,Nនេប៉ាល់, បង់ក្លាដែស្ស, ឡាវ, កម្ពុជា និង វៀតណាម។ ឯកសារយោង តំណភ្ជាប់ខាងក្រៅ គេហទំព័រផ្លូវការ Room to Read
__label__km ចលនាថៃសេរី ( ; អានថា ៖ សេរីថៃ) គឺជាចលនាតស៊ូក្រោមដីរបស់ថៃប្រឆាំងនឹងអធិរាជជប៉ុន ក្នុងអំឡុងសង្គ្រាមលោកលើកទីពីរ។ សេរី​ថៃ​ជា​ប្រភព​ស៊ើបការណ៍​យោធាដ៏សំខាន់សម្រាប់​សម្ព័ន្ធមិត្ត​ក្នុង​តំបន់។ ផ្ទៃខាងក្នុង បន្ទាប់ពីការលុកលុយរបស់ជប៉ុនមកលើប្រទេសថៃ នៅថ្ងៃទី ៧-៨ ខែធ្នូ ឆ្នាំ១៩៤១ របប ប្លែក ពិបូលសង្គ្រាម (ពិបូល) បានប្រកាសសង្រ្គាមលើ ចក្រភពអង់គ្លេស និង សហរដ្ឋអាមេរិក នៅថ្ងៃទី២៥ ខែមករា ឆ្នាំ១៩៤២។ សេនីយ៍ ប្រាមោជ ឯកអគ្គរដ្ឋទូត​ថៃ​ប្រចាំ​ទីក្រុង​វ៉ាស៊ីនតោន​បាន​បដិសេធ​មិន​ប្រគល់​សេចក្តី​ប្រកាស​នេះ​ទៅ​រដ្ឋាភិបាល​សហរដ្ឋអាមេរិក​ទេ។ អាស្រ័យហេតុនេះ សហរដ្ឋអាមេរិក​បាន​បដិសេធ​មិន​ប្រកាស​សង្គ្រាម​លើ​ប្រទេស​ថៃ។ សេនីយ៍ ដែលជាអភិជនអភិរក្សនិយមដែលអត្តសញ្ញាណប្រឆាំងជប៉ុនត្រូវបានបង្កើតឡើងយ៉ាងល្អ បានរៀបចំចលនាថៃសេរី ដោយមានជំនួយពីអាមេរិក ដោយជ្រើសរើសនិស្សិតថៃនៅសហរដ្ឋអាមេរិក ដើម្បីធ្វើការជាមួយការិយាល័យសេវាកម្មយុទ្ធសាស្ត្រសហរដ្ឋអាមេរិក (OSS)។ ការិយាល័យសេវាកម្មយុទ្ធសាស្ត្រសហរដ្ឋអាមេរិក បានបណ្ដុះបណ្ដាលបុគ្គលិកថៃសម្រាប់សកម្មភាពក្រោមដី ហើយអង្គភាពបានត្រៀមលក្ខណៈដើម្បីជ្រៀតចូលប្រទេសថៃ។ នៅចុងបញ្ចប់នៃសង្រ្គាម ប្រជាជនថៃជាង ៥០ ០០០ នាក់ត្រូវបានបណ្តុះបណ្តាល និងបំពាក់អាវុធដើម្បីទប់ទល់នឹងជនជាតិជប៉ុនដោយសមាជិកថៃសេរី ដែលត្រូវបានលោតឆ័ត្រយោងចូលក្នុងប្រទេស។ ឯកសារយោង
__label__km () ដែនរដ្ឋបាលស្ថិតនៅក្នុង ស្រុកព្រៃនប់ ខេត្តព្រះសីហនុ មានរដ្ឋបាលចំណុះ ៥ភូមិ÷ យោងតាម អនុក្រឹត្យលេខ ០៧ អនុក្រ.បក ត្រូវបានប្តូរសង្កាត់អូរឧកញ៉ាហេងទៅជាឃុំឧកញ៉ាហេង និង ប្រកាសលេខ ៤៩៣ ប្រ.ក របស់ក្រសួងមហាផ្ទៃ
__label__km បវរកញ្ញាហ្រ្គែនអន្តរជាតិ () គឺជាការប្រកួតសម្រស់អន្តរជាតិដែលមានមូលដ្ឋាននៅប្រទេសថៃ។ វាត្រូវបានបង្កើតឡើងក្នុងឆ្នាំ ២០១៣ ដោយណាវ៉ាតអាន់តារ៉ាហ្គីល។ វាគឺជាការប្រកួតប្រជែងសម្រស់ដ៏សំខាន់បំផុតមួយនៅក្នុងពិភពលោក។ បញ្ជីរាយនាមបវរកញ្ញាហ្រ្គែនអន្តរជាតិ វិចិត្រសាល បវរកញ្ញាហ្រ្គែនកម្ពុជា ប៊ូតុងពណ៌ ឯកសារយោង Puerto Rico wins the first ever Miss Grand International title, in 2013 Retrieved 28 December 2017. Cuba wins Miss Grand International 2014 Retrieved 28 December 2017. Australian beauty is crowned Miss Grand International 2015 Retrieved 28 December 2017. Miss Grand 2016: Indonesia wins its first ever Grand Slam title! Retrieved 28 December 2017. Miss Grand International 2017 is Miss Peru! Retrieved 28 December 2017. តំណ​ភ្ជាប់​ខាងក្ Official website
__label__km អាស៊ីហ្គេមលើកទី៧ ត្រូវបានប្រារព្ធឡើងនៅទីក្រុងតេអេរ៉ង់ ប្រទេសអ៊ីរ៉ង់ ពីថ្ងៃទី១ ដល់ទី១៦ កញ្ញា ១៩៧៤។ បវិវេណកីឡាអាហ្សាឌី ត្រូវបានសាងសង់ឡើងសំរាប់ព្រឹត្តិការណ៍នេះ។ នេះជាលើកទី១ហើយ ដែលអាស៊ីហ្គេមធ្វើឡើងនៅមជ្ឍិមបូព៌ា។ សហព័ន្ធកីឡាអាស៊ីបានសំរេច​ដកសមាជិកភាពពីសាធារណរដ្ឋចិន(តៃវ៉ាន់) ដោយទទួលយកសាធារណរដ្ឋប្រជាមានិត្យចិនវិញ។ កំនត់ត្រាមេដាយ (ប្រទេសម្ចាស់ផ្ទះត្រូវបានដាក់ពណ៌) ព្រឹត្តិការណ៍កីឡា កាយសំព័ន្ធ តិននីស បាញ់កាំភ្លើង បាល់ទាត់ បាល់ទះ បាល់បោះ បោកចំបាប់ ប្រដាល់ ប្រណាំងកង់ វាយកូនឃ្លីលើតុ វាយសី លើកទំងន់ ហែលទឹក ហុកគី អត្តពលកម្ម Fencing តំនភ្ជាប់ក្រៅ ប្រវត្តិអាស៊ីហ្គេម អាស៊ីហ្គេម
__label__km ក្រុងរាពណ៍ () ក្រុងរាពណ៍ ស្ដេច​យក្ស​សោយរាជ្យ​នៅ​នគរលង្កា​ នៃរឿងរាមកេរ្តិ៍. កំណត់ មើលផងដែរ ​ព្រះ​រាម​ របាំព្រះរាជទ្រព្យ ព្រះលក្សណ៍ ព្រះ​សុត្រុត ព្រះភិរុត ព្រះនាងហ្គ៉ាយ៉ាទ្រី អង្គទ នាង​សីតា នាង​មណ្ឌោលគីរី នាងកាមអគ្ នាគ វត្តព្រះកែវមរកត ព្រហ្មញ្ញ សាសនា ហិណ្ឌូសាសនា ព្រហ្មញ្ញសាសនា ទេវៈនៅក្នុងព្រហ្មញ្ញសាសនា
__label__km () ស្ថិតនៅក្នុង ស្រុកពារាំង ខេត្តព្រៃវែង មាន ៤ភូមិ÷ ព្រំប្រទល់នៃ អប់រំ បឋមសិក្សា អនុវិទ្យាល័យ សាសនា ព្រះពុទ្ធសាសនា វត្ត ផ្សារ រមណីដ្ឋាន ឯកសារពិគ្រោះ គណកម្មការជាតិរៀបចំការបោះឆ្នោត ខេត្តព្រៃវែង
__label__km ពណ៌ស្វាយ គឺជាពណ៌ផ្សេងៗដែលមាន ពណ៌លាំៗ រវាង ក្រហម និង ខៀវ ។ នៅក្នុង គំរូពណ៌ RGB ដែលប្រើក្នុងអេក្រង់កុំព្យូទ័រ និងទូរទស្សន៍ ពណ៌ស្វាយត្រូវបានផលិតដោយ ការលាយ ពន្លឺពណ៌ក្រហម និងពណ៌ខៀវ។ នៅក្នុង គំរូពណ៌ RYB ដែលត្រូវបានប្រើប្រាស់ជាប្រវត្តិសាស្ត្រដោយវិចិត្រករ ពណ៌ស្វាយត្រូវបានបង្កើតឡើងដោយការរួមបញ្ចូលគ្នានៃសារធាតុពណ៌ពណ៌ក្រហម និងពណ៌ខៀវ។ នៅក្នុង គំរូពណ៌ CMYK ដែលប្រើក្នុងការបោះពុម្ព ពណ៌ស្វាយត្រូវបានធ្វើឡើងដោយការរួមបញ្ចូលសារធាតុពណ៌ស្វាយជាមួយនឹងសារធាតុពណ៌ពណ៌ខៀវ សារធាតុពណ៌ខ្មៅ ឬទាំងពីរ។ ពណ៌ស្វាយត្រូវបានផ្សារភ្ជាប់ជាមួយនឹងរាជវង្សតាំងពីយូរយារណាស់មកហើយ ដើមឡើយដោយសារតែថ្នាំពណ៌ស្វាយទីរៀន ដែលផលិតចេញពីទឹករំអិលរបស់ខ្យងមួយប្រភេទ មានតម្លៃថ្លៃខ្លាំងនៅសម័យបុរាណ។ ពណ៌ស្វាយគឺជាពណ៌ដែលពាក់ដោយចៅក្រមរ៉ូម៉ាំង។ វាបានក្លាយជាពណ៌អធិរាជដែលពាក់ដោយអ្នកគ្រប់គ្រងនៃ ចក្រភពប៊ីហ្សេនទីន និង ចក្រភពរ៉ូមបរិសុទ្ធ ហើយក្រោយមកដោយ ប៊ីស្សព រ៉ូម៉ាំងកាតូលិក។ ដូចគ្នានេះដែរនៅក្នុង ប្រទេសជប៉ុន ពណ៌ត្រូវបានផ្សារភ្ជាប់ជាមួយនឹង ព្រះចៅអធិរាជ និងអភិជន។ យោងតាមការស្ទង់មតិសហសម័យនៅក្នុងទ្វីបអឺរ៉ុប និងសហរដ្ឋអាមេរិក ពណ៌ស្វាយគឺជាពណ៌ដែលជាប់ទាក់ទងច្រើនបំផុតជាមួយនឹងភាពកម្រ រាជវង្ស វេទមន្ត អាថ៌កំបាំង និង ការគោរពបូជា ។ នៅពេលផ្សំជាមួយ ពណ៌ផ្កាឈូក វាត្រូវបានផ្សារភ្ជាប់ជាមួយនឹង ភាពស្រើបស្រាល ភាពជាស្ត្រី និង ការល្បួង ។ និរុត្តិសាស្ត្រ និងនិយមន័យ
__label__km អ្នកម្នាងទង អ្នកម្នាងត្រូវជាមហេសីរបស់ព្រះបាទចក្រព័ត្រ ហើយមានបុត្រមួយអង្គព្រះនាម ពញាពេជ្រ។ តែបើយោងទៅតាមពង្សាវតារវត្ដកោកកាកវិញ គេអាចដឹងថា មហេសីរបស់ព្រះបាទចក្រព័ត្រទ្រង់មានគភ៌ នៅពេលដែលដំបងគ្រញូង លើកទ័ពមកវាយប្រហារដណ្ដើមរាជ្យ។ ព្រះនាងបានរត់រួចទៅលាក់ខ្លួនពួនអាត្មា នៅតាមភូមិស្ថាន តំបន់ឆ្ងាយដាច់ស្រយាល។ បន្ទាប់មកព្រះនាងប្រសូតបានបុត្រមួយព្រះអង្គ។ តែគេមិនបាស្គាល់ឈ្មោះព្រះរាជបុត្រអង្គនេះទេ ធំឡើងពេញវ័យកាលណាព្រះរាជបុត្របានមានមហេសី ព្រះមហេសីទ្រង់គភ៌បាន ១០ ខែ កាលក្នុងរាជ្យ និងសម័យដែលស្ដេចពញាក្រែក ឬព្រហ្មកិល ឬព្រះបាទសន្ធពអនុរាជ កោះហៅហោរាឲ្យមក ទស្សន៍ទាយមើលរកអ្នកមានបុណ្យ។ គ្រានោះព្រះរាជបុត្រក៏បានសុគតដែរ តែគេមិនបានដឹងដោយប្រការណាមួយឡើយទេ។ ព្រះរាជបុត្រអង្គនេះ បើតាមពង្សាវតារវត្ដទឹកវិល មានឈ្មោះថាពញាពេជ្រ។ ព្រះមាតា ដែលជាមហេសីព្រះបាទចក្រព័ត្រ មានឈ្មោះថា អ្នកម្នាងទង។ ឯមហេសីរបស់ពញាពេជ្រឈ្មោះ អ្នកម្នាងទេព ដោយក្រោយមកអ្នកម្នាងបានបង្កើតបានបក្សីចាំក្រុង។ អ្នកម្នាងខ្មែរក្នុងរឿងនិទានរាជវង្សទេវង្សអស្ចារ្យ
__label__km វិទ្យុ និងទូរទស្សន៍មីយ៉ាន់ម៉ា ( ជាអក្សរកាត់ MRTV ) ដែលពីមុនជា សេវាផ្សាយរបស់ភូមា ( BBS ) គឺជាមេនៃ សេវាជាតិរបស់វិទ្យុមីយ៉ាន់ម៉ា ដែលគ្រប់គ្រងដោយរដ្ឋ និង ប៉ុស្តិ៍ទូរទស្សន៍ MRTV ។ ប៉ុស្តិ៍ទូរទស្សន៍កំពុងចាក់ផ្សាយពីមជ្ឈមណ្ឌលផ្សាយរបស់ខ្លួននៅទីក្រុង កាម៉ាយុត ទីក្រុងយ៉ាំងហ្គោន ។ ឥឡូវនេះសេវាវិទ្យុកំពុងផ្សាយជាចម្បងពី ទីក្រុងណៃពិដោរ។ ឯកសារយោង
__label__km ភូមិបឹងប្រីមាន២០ចំណុចតូចៗគឺ៖ បឹងវាល ម្រាម បឹងកក់ បុស្សត្រាច ក្ដួច បឹងប្រី ទួលតាកៅ គ្រឹះថ្លុង អូរអន្លក់ បឹងធ្នង់ បឹងឫស្សី ឆកកណ្ដោល អូរព្រាល ឈើទាលពួយ អណ្ដើក១១ (មួយភាគតូច ចំណុចគោលនៅស្រុករតនមណ្ឌល) ក្បាលក្របី ចម្ការចិន ពោធិ៍សំរោង បួនជួរ ​' ភូមិបឹងប្រីមានសាលាបឋមសិក្សាចំនួន៣កន្លែង និងវត្តអារាម២កន្លែង។'​​ ភូមិនេះមានផ្ទៃក្រឡាប្រហែល 50km^2៕'' '
__label__km ព្រាហ្មណ៍ជយមហាប្រធាន (អានថា:ចីមហាប្រធាន) រជ្ជកាល (ជយវម៌្មទី៩) ត្រូវជាបិតាក្មេកផងនិងរាជបុរោហិតរបស់វ្រះបាទជយវម៌្មទី៩ផងដែរ។ ដែលព្រះ​អគ្គមហេសី​របស់​ជយវម៌្មទី៩ មាន​ព្រះនាម​ថា ព្រះនាងចក្រវាទីរាជទេវី ជា​កូន​ស្រី​របស់​លោក​រាជបុរោហិត ឬ​សីកេសា។ បុរោហិតនៃកម្វុជទេឝព្រាហ្មណ៍នៃកម្វុជទេឝព្រហ្មញ្ញសាសនិកនៃកម្វុជទេឝរាជបិតាក្មេកនៃកម្វុជទេឝ
__label__km ឬអាចសរសេរបានថា​ អ៊ីវ៉ាតេ គឺជាខេត្តរបស់ប្រទេសជប៉ុន មានទីតាំងនៅតំបន់ថូហូគឹរបស់កោះហុងស្ស៊ូ ជាខេត្តធំទីពីររបស់ប្រទេសជប៉ុនដែលមានផ្ទៃដី 15,275 គីឡូម៉ែត្រការ៉េ (5,898 ម៉ាយការ៉េ​)​ ជាមួយនឹងចំនួនប្រជាជន 1,210,534 នាក់ (គិតត្រឹមថ្ងៃទី 1 ខែតុលា ឆ្នាំ 2020) ខេត្តអ៊ីវ៉ាតិមានព្រំប្រទល់ជាប់ខេត្តអាអូម៉ូរីទៅភាគខាងជើង ខេត្តអាគីតាទៅភាគខាងលិច និងខេត្តមីយ៉ាហ្គិទៅភាគខាងត្បូង ទីក្រុងម៉ូរីអូកាគឺជារដ្ឋធានី និងជាទីក្រុងធំបំផុតនៃខេត្តអ៊ីវ៉ាតិ ទីក្រុងសំខាន់ៗផ្សេងទៀតរួមមានអ៊ីឈិណុសិគិ អូស្ស៊ូ និងហាណាម៉ាគិ​​ មានទីតាំងនៅឆ្នេរសមុទ្រប៉ាស៊ីហ្វិករបស់ប្រទេសជប៉ុន ខេត្តអ៊ីវ៉ាតិមានចំណុចភាគខាងកើតបំផុតនៃកោះហុងស្ស៊ូនៅជ្រោយតូដូ និងចែករំលែកកំពូលភ្នំអូអ៊ឹ ដែលជាជួរភ្នំវែងបំផុតនៅក្នុងប្រទេសជប៉ុន នៅព្រំដែនជាមួយខេត្តអាគីតា ខេត្តអ៊ីវ៉ាតិជា​កន្លែង​សម្រាប់​ភាព​ទាក់ទាញ​ល្បីៗ​ដូចជាប្រាសាទម៉ូរីអូកា ប្រាសាទពុទ្ធសាសនារបស់ហ៊ីរ៉ៃហ្ស៊ឹមិ រួមមានវត្តឈូសុននិងវត្តម៉ូត្ស៊ឹ កន្លែងកុនហ្វ៊ឹជិវ៉ារ៉ាណុសាតូ និងសួនកម្សាន្តនៅអូស្ស៊ូ និងឧទ្យានតេនស្ស៊ូឈិនៅគីតាកាមិដែលត្រូវបានគេស្គាល់ថាមានទំហំធំ ដើមឈើផ្លែឆឺរីបុរាណ អ៊ីវ៉ាតិមានដង់ស៊ីតេប្រជាជនទាបបំផុតនៃខេត្តណាមួយនៅខាងក្រៅកោះហុកកៃដូ 5% នៃផ្ទៃដីសរុបរបស់ខ្លួន ត្រូវបានគេកំណត់ថាជាឧទ្យានជាតិ ឈ្មោះ ប្រវត្តិ ភូមិសាស្ត្រ់ ឯកសារយោង ខេត្តរបស់ប្រទេសជប៉ុន
__label__km គីម យ៉ូចុង ( ; កើតថ្ងៃទី 26 ខែកញ្ញា ឆ្នាំ 1987) ជាអ្នកនយោបាយ និងអ្នកការទូតកូរ៉េខាងជើង បម្រើការជាអនុប្រធាននាយកដ្ឋាននៃនាយកដ្ឋាន ផ្សព្វផ្សាយ និងព័ត៌មាន នៃ គណបក្សពលករកូរ៉េ ( WPK )។ នាងក៏បានបម្រើការជាសមាជិកជំនួសនៃ ការិយាល័យនយោបាយនៃគណបក្សពលករកូរ៉េ ពីឆ្នាំ 2017 ដល់ឆ្នាំ 2019 និងម្តងទៀតពីឆ្នាំ 2020 ដល់ឆ្នាំ 2021។ ចាប់តាំងពីខែកញ្ញា ឆ្នាំ 2021 នាងក៏បានបម្រើការជាសមាជិកនៃ គណៈកម្មាការកិច្ចការរដ្ឋនៃប្រទេសកូរ៉េខាងជើង ជាស្ត្រីតែមួយគត់នៅក្នុងក្រុមនេះ។ អ្នកស្រី គឺជាកូនពៅរបស់មេដឹកនាំកំពូលទីពីររបស់កូរ៉េខាងជើង គីម ចុងអ៊ីល និងជាប្អូនស្រីរបស់ គីម ជុងអ៊ុន ដែលជា មេដឹកនាំកំពូល បច្ចុប្បន្ន និង ជាអគ្គលេខាធិការបក្សពលករកូរ៉េ ហើយត្រូវបានអ្នកអត្ថាធិប្បាយមួយចំនួនចាត់ទុកថាជាអ្នកស្នងតំណែង។ ឯកសារយោង បុគ្គលនៅរស់ បុគ្គលដែលកើតនៅឆ្នាំ ១៩៨៧ Articles containing Korean-language text
__label__km នៅក្នងគណិតវិទ្យា វិសមភាព យិនសិន (Jensin's inequality) ត្រូវបានយកឈ្មោះបន្ទាប់ពីឈ្មោះរបស់លោក យូហាន យិនសិន (Juhan Jensen)។ វិសមភាពនេះនិយាយទាក់ទងទៅភាពប៉ោងនិងភាពផតនៃអនុគមន៍ ហើយវិសមភាពត្រូវបានស្រាយបញ្ជាក់ដោយលោក យិនសិន នៅឆ្នាំ 1906 ដែលលោកបានអោយនូវលក្ខណៈទូទៅរបស់វា។ វិសមភាពនេះបានចែងដូចខាងក្រោមៈ ចំពោះអនុគមន៍ ជាអនុគមន៍ប៉ោងលើចន្លោះ និងចំពោះ គេបានៈ ចំពោះអនុគមន៍ ជាអនុគមន៍ផតលើចន្លោះ និងចំពោះ គេបានៈ វិមសភាពនេះត្រូវបានអោយក្រោមទំរង់ទូទៅដូចខាងក្រោមៈ ចំពោះអនុគមន៍ ជាអនុគមន៍ប៉ោងលើចន្លោះ និងចំពោះ និងចំពោះ គេបានៈ ចំពោះអនុគមន៍ ជាអនុគមន៍ផតលើចន្លោះ និងចំពោះ និងចំពោះ គេបានៈ ឬក៏គេអាចសរសេរនូវរាងមួយទៀតគឺៈ ចំពោះអនុគមន៍ ជាអនុគមន៍ប៉ោងលើចន្លោះ និងចំពោះ និងចំពោះ គេបានៈ ចំពោះអនុគមន៍ ជាអនុគមន៍ផតលើចន្លោះ និងចំពោះ និងចំពោះ គេបានៈ ចំណាំៈ យិនសិន គណិតវិទ្យា
__label__km ក្នុងធរណីមាត្រ ទ្រឹស្តីបទស្តេអាត (Stewart's theorem) នាំមកនូវទំនាក់ទំនងរវាងរង្វាស់ជ្រុងនៃត្រីកោណ និង រង្វាស់អង្កត់ពីកំពូលទៅកាន់ជ្រុងឈមនឹងកំពូលនោះ។ តាង a, b, c ជារង្វាស់ជ្រុងនៃត្រីកោណ តាង p ជារង្វាស់អង្កត់ពី A ទៅចំនុចនៅលើជ្រុង BC ដែលចែកអង្កត់ BC ជាពីរមានរង្វាស់រៀងគ្នា x និង y ។ គេបាន ឬក៏ សំរាយបញ្ជាក់ ហៅចំនុច P ជាចំនុចប្រសព្វរវាង a និង p ។ យើងចាប់ផ្តើមអនុវត្តទ្រឹស្តីបទកូស៊ីនុសចំពោះមុំបំពេញ APB និង APC ។ គុណសមីការទី១នឹង x និងគុណសមីការទី២នឹង y គេបាន ដោយបូកសមីការទាំងពីរបញ្ចូលគ្នា យើងទទួលបានទ្រឹស្តីស្តេអាតដូចខាងក្រោម សូមមើលផងដែរ ទ្រឹស្តីបទមេដ្យាន ទ្រឹស្តីបទអាប៉ូឡូនុស (Apollonius' theorem) ធរណីមាត្រ ធរណីមាត្រត្រីកោណ ស្តេអាត
__label__km ល្ខោនស្បែកតូច ត្រូវបានគេស្គាល់ក្នុងភូមិកំពង់តាយ៉ុង ខេត្តសៀមរាប។ តុក្កតាធ្វើពីស្បែកសត្វស្លាប់ ដៃនិងជើងអាចធ្វើចលនា និងមានឈើតូចមួយដោតជាប់នឹងដងខ្លួន មាត់អាចបើក និយាយ ច្រៀង ងាយនិងធ្វើអត្ថាធិប្បាយតាមបាននៅក្នុងរឿង។ សាច់រឿង ភាគច្រើនជារឿង កំប្លែងនិងដកស្រង់ ពីរឿងនិទានពីជីវិតប្រចាំថ្ងៃ កាលជំនាន់បុរាណ៕ ប្រភព ក្រសួងវប្បធម៌ និងវិចិត្រសិល្បៈ ល្ខោនខ្មែរ
__label__km រដ្ឋបាល ឃុំអន្សោងជាឃុំមួយស្ថិតនៅក្នុងស្រុកកំពង់ត្របែក, ខេត្តព្រៃវែង។ ឃុំអន្សោង មាន ៨ឃុំ គឺ÷ គ្រើល អង្វះមួយរយ អន្សោង តាពូង សំបូរ តាអោង បន្ទាបុស្ស ត្រពាំងរកា ឯកសារយោង ឯកសារពិគ្រោះ គណកម្មការជាតិរៀបចំការបោះឆ្នោត ខេត្តព្រៃវែង
__label__km រដ្ឋបាល ឃុំបរខាំ មាន ៥ភូមិគឺ÷ ទុង ដេះ ប្លរ តាកុកច្រាយ ព្រិល ព្រំប្រទល់ អប់រំ បឋមសិក្សា បឋមសិក្សាកុកពង បឋមសិក្សាកុកច្រាយ បឋមសិក្សាបួរ បឋមសិក្សាទុង បឋមសិក្សាព្រិល អនុវិទ្យាល័យ សាសនា ព្រះពុទ្ធសាសនា វត្ត ផ្សារ រមណីដ្ឋាន ឯកសារពិគ្រោះ ខេត្តរតនគិរី
__label__km ទីរួមខេត្តឃ្លាំង ឬ ស្រុកឃ្លាំង គឺជាទីរួមខេត្តមួយនៅដែនដីកម្ពុជាក្រោម ។ ដែលជាទីរួមខេត្តនៃ ខេត្តឃ្លាំង ។ ឈ្មោះ ឈ្មោះ​នេះ​ត្រូវមាន​ប្រភព​មក​ពី ​ភាសា​ខ្មែរ ។ ឈ្មោះ​ខ្មែរ​សម្រាប់​ខេត្ត​នេះ គឺ ​ស្រុក​ឃ្លាំង ។ ការបែងចែករដ្ឋបាល ទីក្រុង​សោក​ត្រាង​ត្រូវ​បាន​បែង​ចែក​ជា​១០​ផ្នែក​រដ្ឋបាល​ពី​លេខ​១​ដល់​១០។ ទីក្រុងនេះមានព្រំប្រទល់ជាប់នឹង ស្រុក អណ្តូងទឹក នៅខាងកើត និងខាងជើង ស្រុក កំពង់ធំ នៅខាងលិច និងខាងជើង ស្រុក Châu Thành ខាងលិច និង ស្រុក បាយឆៅ នៅភាគខាងត្បូង។ ចំនួនប្រជាជន ក្រៅពីជនជាតិភាគតិច យួន ក៏មានជនជាតិចិន និងជនជាតិ ខ្មែរ សំខាន់ៗនៅក្នុងទីក្រុងផងដែរ។ វប្បធម៌ ការដឹកជញ្ជូន ឯកសារយោង
__label__km ({{lang-en| $ Commune}}) ជាដែនរដ្ឋបាលស្ថិតនៅក្នុង ស្រុកជើងព្រៃ ខេត្តកំពង់ចាម មាន ភូមិ៖ ព្រំប្រទល់នៃ រដ្ឋបាល ឃុំព្រៃចារមាន ៦ភូមិគឺ ព្រៃចារក្រៅ ព្រៃចារក្នុង បាទី ព្នៅលិច ព្នៅកើត សៀមបោយ អប់រំ បឋមសិក្សា អនុវិទ្យាល័យ សុខាភិបាល មណ្ឌលសុខភាព រដ្ឋ ឯកជន សាសនា ព្រះពុទ្ធ វត្តវត្តសេរីបានទេវត្តសិរីបាទី ផ្សារ រមណីយដ្ឋាន ឯកសារពិគ្រោះ គណកម្មការជាតិរៀបចំការបោះឆ្នោត ខេត្តកំពង់ចាម
__label__km () ដែនរដ្ឋបាលស្ថិតនៅក្នុង ក្រុងសំរោង ខេត្តឧត្តរមានជ័យ មាន ៣០ភូមិ÷ ព្រំប្រទល់នៃ Boundary East ឃុំត្រពាំងតាវ ស្រុកអន្លង់វែង West សង្កាត់បន្សាយរាក់ សង្កាត់សំរោង ក្រុងសំរោង South សង្កាត់សំរោង ក្រុងសំរោង North ប្រទេសថៃឡង់ដ៏
__label__km (,,) គឺជា​ឧបករណ៍​ភ្លេងបុរាណ​ឥណ្ឌា ​មួយ​ប្រភេទ​ ដែល​មាន​ប្រភព​ដើម​កំណើត​មក​ពី​ប្រទេសឥណ្ឌា.។ ៚ កំណត់ មើលផងដែរ ចូលឆ្នាំខ្មែរ ឬ សង្ក្រាន្តខ្មែរ ពិណ សរស្វតីវីណា រុទ្រៈវីណា វីចិត្រាវីណា ចិត្រាវីណា ភីផា
__label__km រង្វាស់កាព្យ ក្នុង១វគ្គមាន៤ឃ្លា ក្នុង១ឃ្លាមាន៦ព្យាង្គ។ ចំណាប់​ចួន ចួន​ក្នុង​វគ្គ ព្យាង្គ៦ឃ្លា១វគ្គ១ |=| ព្យាង្គ២ រឺ ព្យាង្គ៤ឃ្លា២វគ្គ១ ព្យាង្គ៦ឃ្លា៣វគ្គ២ |=| ព្យាង្គ២ រឺ ព្យាង្គ៤ឃ្លា៤វគ្គ២ |=| ព្យាង្គ៦ឃ្លា២វគ្គ១ ។ ចួន​ឆ្លង​វគ្គ ព្យាង្គ៦ឃ្លា៤វគ្គ១ |=| ព្យាង្គ៦ឃ្លា២វគ្គ២។
__label__km ត្រីរាជជាប្រភេទត្រីមួយកំពុងទទួលការគំរាមកំហែងបាត់ពូជ ដែលត្រូវការពារក្នុងចំណោមត្រីរាជបួន ដែលត្រូវចិញ្ចឹមចំនួន៧ឆ្នាំដោយអង្គការក្រៅរាជរដ្ឋាភិបាលមួយនោះមានត្រីចំនួនពីរត្រូវបានយកទៅដាក់នៅទន្លេមេគង្គឱ្យរស់បន្តពូជតទៅទៀត។ កាលណាវាមានអាយុ៧ឆ្នាំ ត្រីរាជនីមួយៗមានបណ្តោយ២ម៉ែត្រ និងមានទម្ងន់ពី១៥០គីឡូក្រាមទៅ២០០គីឡូក្រាម។
__label__km 5,000រៀល ក្រដាស់ប្រាក 5000រៀល មាន វិមាត្រ 146 x 68 មីលីម៉ែត្រ ពណ៍ចម្បង បៃតងនិងពណ៌ប្រផេះ រូបតំណាងខាងមុខ នរោត្តមសីហនុ រូបតំណាងខាងក្រោយ ស្ពានកំពង់ក្ដី (ខេត្តសៀមរាប) ដាក់អោយប្រើប្រាស់ ថ្ងៃទី 6 ខែមេសាឆ្នាំ 2001 មើលផងដែរ
__label__km អាល់ប៊ុម Dhoom Dhoom គឺជា Album Cover របស់អ្នកចម្រៀង ពេជ្រ សោភា ចេញផ្សាយដោយ ផលិតកម្ម រស្មីហង្សមាស CD Vol.294 ឆ្នាំ 2005 ដែលយកតាមលំនាំបទដើម Dhoom Dhoom របស់តារាចម្រៀង (តាតាយ៉ាំង/Tata Young) ក្នុងរឿង Dhoom នៃខ្សែរភាពយន្តឥណ្ឌា Bollywood នៅអំឡុងចុងឆ្នាំ 2004 ។ បទក្នុងអាល់ប៊ុម 01. Dhoom Dhoom - ពេជ្រ សោភា Ft. B.I.G 02. ផ្កាប្ដូរពណ៌ - ណុប​ ប៉ាយ៉ារិទ្ធ 03. Oh My Love - ណុប​ ប៉ាយ៉ារិទ្ធ 04. Every Time - ពេជ្រ សោភា 05. No Answer - ណុប​ ប៉ាយ៉ារិទ្ធ 06. កម្មសិទ្ធគេ - ពេជ្រ សោភា 07. ស្វែងរក - ពេជ្រ សោភា 08. អូនលែងអាសូរ - ណុប​ ប៉ាយ៉ារិទ្ធ 09. ទារចិត្តពីបង - ពេជ្រ សោភា 10. ស្ម័គជូតទឹកភ្នែក - ណុប​ ប៉ាយ៉ារិទ្ធ Ft. ពេជ្រ សោភា តំណភ្ជាប់
__label__km ខេត្តចង្វាត្រពាំង (Changva Trapeng) រឺ ខេត្តស្រកីត្រី (Sraka Trey) ជាខេត្តខ្មែរនៅ កម្ពុជាក្រោម ដែលបានបាត់បង់ទៅប្រទេសវៀតណាម នៅឆ្នាំ១៦៥១ ដែលយួនប្ដូរឈ្មោះទៅជា បៀង ហ្វាង (Bien Hoa)។ ប្រវត្តិខេត្ត ការបាត់បង់ខេត្តត្រពាំងចង្វា(Bien hoa) រដ្ឋបាល ខេត្តចង្វាត្រពាំង ត្រូវបានបែងចែកជា ស្រុក គឺ÷ ប្រជារាស្រ្ត អប់រំ វត្ត មើលផងដែរ ខេត្តក្រុងនៃកម្ពុជាក្រោម
__label__km សង្កាត់បឹងទំពុនទី១ (អក្សរឡាតាំង: Boeng Tompun Ti Muoy រឺ Sangkat Boeng Tompun Ti Muoy) ដែនរដ្ឋបាលស្ថិតនៅក្នុង ខណ្ឌមានជ័យ រាជធានីភ្នំពេញ មានភូមិចំណុះ ១១ ភូមិ។ និរុត្តិសាស្ត្រ យកតាមឈ្មោះ សង្កាត់បឹងទំពុន ចាស់ បូកជាមួយ ទី១ ទៅជា បឹងទំពុនទី១។ ប្រវត្តិ មុនពេលកាត់បំបែកចេញជាពីរសង្កាត់នៅក្នុងខណ្ឌមានជ័យ សង្កាត់បឹងទំពុនទី១ ជាដែនដីដែលស្ថិតក្នុងរដ្ឋបាលនៃសង្កាត់បឹងទំពុន។ បំណែងចែករដ្ឋបាល អនុក្រឹត្យ លេខ ១៤៦ អនក្រ.បក ចុះថ្ងៃទី១៨ ខែកក្កដា ឆ្នាំ២០១៦ ត្រូវបានបំបែកពី សង្កាត់បឹងទំពុន ចាស់ ទៅជាពីរសង្កាត់គឺ បឹងទំពុនទី១ បឹងទំពុនទី២ ហើយសង្កាត់បឹងទំពុនទី១ ភូមិទាំងអស់ ១១ ភូមិ។ ភូមិក្រមគឺ ១២០៦០៦ អប់រំ សាលាបឋមសិក្សាវត្តសន្សំកុសល សាលាបឋមសិក្សាចំរើនផល សាសនា វត្តសន្សំកុសល សុខាភិបាល មណ្ឌលសុខភាពបឹងទំពុន សេដ្ឋកិច្ច ផ្សារបឹងទំពុន ឯកសារយោង សង្កាត់នៃខណ្ឌមានជ័យ
__label__km ក្រពើជាសត្វសាហាវ ស៊ីសាច់ស្រស់។ Etymology អំបូរ Characteristics ទំហំ Biology and behavior Senses Vision Olfaction Hearing Touch Hunting and diet Bite Locomotion Longevity Social behavior and vocalization ការបន្តពូជ ទំនាក់ទំនងជាមួយមនុស្ស គ្រោះថ្នាក់នានាដល់មនុស្ស ផលិតផលអំពីក្រពើ Taxonomy and phylogeny Phylogeny មើលផងដែរ ឯកសារយោង អានបន្ថែម តំណភ្ជាប់ខាងក្រៅ
__label__km មុននឹងទៅដល់ប្រាសាទ បាសែត យើងឆៀងចូលវត្ត តាប៉ុន ។ វត្តនេះក៏នៅសេសសល់ថ្មបង្គុំប្រាសាទ និង ថ្មតុបតែងលម្អខ្លះៗ ។ ចេញពីប្រាសាទបាសែត ទៅមុខទៀតយើងបានទៅដល់វត្ត សម្តេច ។ វត្តនេះនៅសេសសល់ មរតកវប្បធម៌ច្រើនណាស់ដែលមិនទាន់បានរៀបរយក្នុងរបៀបជំនាញ ។ ទៅមុខទៀត អ្នកស្រុកបានប្រាប់ថា ៖ [ ....មានទួលប្រាសាទមួយ ដែលសព្វថ្ងៃមិនមានអ្វីនៅសេសសល់ទៀតទេ .....ដុំថ្មធំៗត្រូវគេដឹកចេញ ដើម្បីទុកអោយដីមានសភាពជាដីភូមិធម្មតា មិនមែនជាទីទួលប្រាសាទ.... ។ ] យើងមិនជឿមួយរយភាគរយទេ ព្រោះថាមានមនុស្សតិចណាស់ដែលហៅថាជាទួលប្រាសាទ តាកែពង ។ ភាគដទៃគ្រាន់តែដឹងថាជាទួលប្រាសាទ រីភាគច្រើននោះ គឺមិនបានដឹងអ្វីទំាងអស់តែម្តង ។ ពេលយើងទៅដល់ ទីនោះគឺជាដីភូមិមានម្ចាស់នឹងត្រូវបានចាក់សោរយ៉ាងត្រឹមត្រូវ ។ ខាងក្រោមគឺជាសិលាចារឹកមកពីប្រាសាទតាកែពង និង ទីដីភូមិដែលអ្នកស្រុកខ្លះថាជាដីប្រាសាទតាកែពង ។ តាកែពង
__label__km តើ​ការ​លះ​បង់​ចោល​អ្វីៗ​ទាំង​អស់​មាន​ន័យ​យ៉ាង​ដូចម្តេច?​
__label__km សៀវភៅ​មួយ​ណា​ក៏​បាន ឱ្យ​តែ​វា​គួរ​ឱ្យ​ចាប់​អារម្មណ៍​។
__label__km ចូរ​អ្នក​ធ្វើ​លើ​គេ ដូចដែល​អ្នក​ចង់​ឱ្យ​អ្នក​ដទៃ​ធ្វើ​មក​លើ​អ្នក​វិញ​ដូច្នេះ​ដែរ ។
__label__km ទូរស័ព្ទ​នៅ​លើ​តុ​របស់​ខ្ញុំ​បាន​រោទ៍​ខ្លាំង​រហូត​។
__label__km ប៉ុន្តែ​សិស្ស​មិន​អាច​យក​លេស​រួច​ខ្លួន​បាន​ទេ បើ​គេ​មិន​មាន​ភាព​ឧស្សាហ៍។
__label__km ហើយ​គឺ​ជា​សេចក្តី​ស្រឡាញ់​ដែល​រង​ទុក្ខ​យូរ​អង្វែង​ហើយ​និង​សប្បុរស។
__label__km គឺ​ជា​សេចក្តី​ស្រឡាញ់​ដែល​គ្រប​បាំង​អំពើ​បាប​ជា​អនេកអនន្ត។
__label__km នេះ​គឺ​ជា​សេចក្តី​ស្រឡាញ់​ដែល​ចាត់​ទុក​អ្នក​ដទៃ​ប្រសើរ​ជា​ជាង​ខ្លួនឯង។
__label__km សិស្ស​នៅ​តែ​​អាច​ទទួល​បាន​នូវ​ការ​អត់ទោស​​​បើ​ទោះ​ជា​គេ​មិន​មាន​សមត្ថភាព​ខ្លាំង​ក្លា​ខាង​ប្រាជ្ញា​ក៏​ដោយ។
__label__km ការ​បដិសេធ​ខ្លួន​ឯង​មាន​ន័យ​ថា ការ​តម​អាហារ ការ​តម​ការ​សប្បាយរីករាយ ឬ​ការ​លះបង់​ទ្រព្យសម្បត្តិ​ផ្សេងៗ។
__label__km ខ្លួន​ប្រាណ​ឆាប់​ស៊ាំ​នឹង​អាកាសធាតុ​ផ្លាស់ប្តូរ​យ៉ាង​ឆាប់​រហ័ស​។
__label__km តើ​អ្នក​ឈ្មោះ​អ្វី​?
__label__km អ្នក​គួរ​ប្រយ័ត្ន​នៅ​ពេល​ក្រោយ​។
__label__km ខ្ញុំ​គឺ​និស្សិត​។
__label__km តើ​អ្នក​ជនជាតិ​អ្វី​?
__label__km ជំរាបលា​!
__label__km អរុណសួស្ដី!
__label__km បំភ្លេច​ចោល​ទៅ​!
__label__km ខ្ញុំ​ជិះ​ឡាន​ក្រុង​ទៅ​សាលារៀន​។
__label__km ត្របក​ផ្កា​កុលាប​ស្រួយ​ណាស់​។
__label__km ខ្ញុំ​ស្គាល់​ក្មេង​ស្រី​ម្នាក់​ដែល​ញញឹម​រហូត​។
__label__km សេរីភាព​មិន​មែន​ហ៊្វ្រី​ទេ​។
__label__km ខ្ញុំ​ធ្វើការ​ក្នុង​ឱសថស្ថាន​។
__label__km ពួកគេ​ពេញចិត្ត​នឹង​កិច្ចសន្យា​នោះ​។
__label__km ខ្ញុំ​ចង់​ទៅ​ជាមួយ​អ្នក​។
__label__km កូនក្មេង​ណា​ម្នាក់​ក៏​អាច​ធ្វើ​អញ្ចឹង​។
__label__km ភរ​លេង ។
__label__km អាឡូ សុខ​សប្បាយ​?
__label__km រីករាយ​ណាស់​ដែល​បាន​ជួប​ទៀត​។
__label__km ឥន្ទ្រី​មួយ​ហោះ​ទៅ​លើ​មេឃ​ជា​ខ្ពស់​។
__label__km គាត់​បាន​ញ៉ាំ​ទាំង​អស់​។
__label__km គឺ​ការភ្ញាក់ផ្អើល​។
__label__km តើ​អ្នក​គិត​ថា​រ៉ូប​នោះ​សម​នឹង​នាង​ទេ​?
__label__km ប្រកប "pretty" យ៉ាង​ម៉េច​?
__label__km ផ្លែ​ប៉ោម​នៅ​លើ​តុ​។
__label__km សុខសប្បាយ​ទេ? សប្បាយ? អត់?
__label__km ម៉ាក់​ខ្ញុំ​ខឹង​។
__label__km ខ្យល់ព្យុះភាគច្រើនទៅខាងជប៉ុន ។
__label__km អញ្ចឹងមែន ?
__label__km ដាក់​អំបិល​និង​សូដ្យូមប៊ីកាបូណាត​ចូល​ទឹក​។
__label__km នាង​បាន​រៀបការ​ជាមួយ​ជន​បរទេស​។
__label__km អ្នកមកពីប្រទេសណា?
__label__km ប្រហែលជាគាត់ជិះរថភ្លើងជើងក្រោយ ។
__label__km អ្នក​ឈ្មោះ​អី​?
__label__km តើនរណាគឺម្ចាស់ពិធីជប់លៀងថ្ងៃនេះ ?
__label__km អត់​ចូលចិត្ត​វា​ទេ​?
__label__km ពួកយើង​ទើបតែ​ញ៉ាំ​ស៊ូស៊ី និង​ផឹក​ស្រាបៀរ​។
__label__km ស្ថានី​រថភ្លើង​ជិត​បំផុត​នៅ​ណា​?
__label__km កាតឥណទាន​ខ្ញុំត្រូវបានគេលួចនៅរថភ្លើងក្រោមដី ។
__label__km លា​ហើយ​!
__label__km អក្សរ​សរសេរ​ដៃ​របស់​គាត់​អាក្រក់​។
__label__km ខ្ញុំ​អត់​និយាយ​ភាសា​ជប៉ុន​ទេ​។
__label__km ក្មេងប្រុស​ទិញ​ឆ្កែ​។
__label__km ស្តេចលោភនឹងអំណាច​ ។
__label__km ខ្ញុំ​មក​និយាយ ជំរាបលា​។
__label__km ខ្ញុំអត់ប្រាបដថា ចច នឹងពេញចិត្តគំនិតនេះឬអត់ ។
__label__km នាង​អត់​នៅ​ផ្ទះ​ទេ នាង​នៅ​សាលារៀន​។
__label__km នំខេក​នេះ​មាន​ដាក់​ម្សៅ ទឹកដោះគោ ពងមាន់ និង ស្ករ​។
__label__km យើងគឺពិសេស ។
__label__km ផ្ទះ​ត្រជាក់​។
__label__km ម្សិលមិញ​ធ្លាក់​ព្រិល​។
__label__km ដាក់​ទឹក​ចូល​ឆ្នាំង​ទៅ​។
__label__km ឆ្កែ​បាន​បោល​ចេញ​យ៉ាង​លឿន​។
__label__km រឿងនេះត្រូវបានផ្សះផ្សារួចហើយ ។
__label__km ខ្ញុំ​តែងតែ​អាន​សៀភៅ​នោះ ។
__label__km សន្និសិទ​ចំណាយ​ពេល ២​ម៉ោង​។
__label__km នាង​បាន​រៀបការ​ជាមួយ​ជនជាតិ​អាមេរិក​។
__label__km បរិមាណូមិនអាចមើលឃើញដោយភ្នែកទទេបានទេ ។
__label__km អ្នក​ចូលចិត្ត​ភ្លេង​ទេ​?
__label__km មិន​សំខាន់​ទេ​។
__label__km សរសេរ​អំពី​អ្វី​ថ្ងៃ​នេះ​?
__label__km សុខ​សប្បាយ​?
__label__km លា​សិន​ហើយ​។
__label__km កូន​គ្មេង​នោះ​បាន​បង្ករ​បញ្ហា​ច្រើន​។
__label__km ស្តេច​បាន​គ្រប់គ្រង​ប្រទេស​។
__label__km អ្នកសុខសប្បាយទេ?
__label__km ស្តេចផ្ចាញ់នឹងសត្រូវ ។
__label__km ម៉ារី ​សិចស៊ី​ណាស់​ ។
__label__km គាត់បានបាត់បង់លំនឹង នាំឱ្យគាត់ធ្លាក់ ។
__label__km ឆ្កែ​ខាំ​បុរស​។
__label__km ខ្ញុំ​មាន​ឆ្មា​ពីរ​។
__label__km នេះ​គឺ​រឿង​ល្អ​ឬ​?
__label__km ខ្ញុំ​គិត​ថា​អ្នក​ត្រូវ​ជួប​គាត់​។
__label__km នេះ​គឺ​លើក​ដំបូង​ដែល​ខ្ញុំ​សរសេរ​ជា​ភាសា​អារ៉ាប់​។
__label__km គាត់​ចូលចិត្ត​រត់​។
__label__km ប៉ា​របស់​ប្រពន្ធ​ខ្ញុំ គឺ​ប៉ា​ក្មេក​របស់​ខ្ញុំ​។
__label__km « ពិតមែនហេ៎ ? » « ​បាទ៎ ពីណាគេប្រាប់ ? »
__label__km ខ្ញុំ​ទៅ​សាលារៀន​ព្រោះ​ចង់​រៀន​។
__label__km នាង​មាន​ចិត្ត​ល្អ​។
__label__km ខ្ញុំចង់រស់។
__label__km នរណាចង់ម៉ោ នាំម៉ោក៏បានដែរ ។
__label__km ម្តង​ទៀត ម៉េច​ដែរ​?
__label__km «អរគុណ» «អត់អីអេ៎»
__label__km អរគុណ​ច្រើន​!
__label__km ពួកគេ​បាន​ភ័យ​។
__label__km ប៊ីបាវ​គឺ​ទីក្រុង​មួយ​ក្នុង​រដ្ឋ​បាស្ក​។
__label__km ដោយយល់ឃើញថា ដោយសហប្រតិបត្ដិការជាមួយអង្គការសហប្រជាជាតិ រដ្ឋជាសមាជិកទាំងអស់សន្យាធ្វើឱ្យមានការគោរពជាសកល និងការប្រតិបត្ដិនូវសិទ្ធិ និងសេរីភាពមូលដ្ឋាន។
__label__km បុគ្គលម្នាក់ៗ មានសិទ្ធិរស់រានមានជីវិត សេរីភាព និងសន្ដិសុខផ្ទាល់ខ្លួន។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិសេរីភាពក្នុងការប្រជុំ ឬការរួមគ្នាជាសមាគម ដោយសន្ដិវិធី។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិចូលបម្រើមុខងារសាធារណៈនៃប្រទេសរបស់ខ្លួន ក្នុងលក្ខខណ្ឌសមភាព។
__label__km គ្រួសារជាអង្គភាពធម្មជាតិនិងជាអង្គភាពមូលដ្ឋាននៃសង្គម ហើយគ្រួសារមានសិទ្ធិទទួលការការពារពីសង្គមនិងរដ្ឋ។
__label__km គ្មានជនណាម្នាក់ ត្រូវបានដកហូតកម្មសិទ្ធិ តាមអំពើចិត្ដឡើយ ។
__label__km តែយ៉ាងណាក៏ដោយ សិទ្ធិនិងសេរីភាពទាំងនេះ មិនអាចយកទៅប្រើប្រាស់ផ្ទុយនឹងគោលបំណង និងគោលការណ៍ទាំងឡាយរបស់សហប្រជាជាតិឡើយ។
__label__km អាពាហ៍ពិពាហ៍នឹងអាចប្រព្រឹត្ដទៅបាន លុះត្រាតែមានការព្រមព្រៀងដោយសេរី និងពេញលេញពីអនាគតប្ដីប្រពន្ធ។
__label__km ជនគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិឱ្យគេទទួលស្គាល់បុគ្គលិកលក្ខណៈគតិយុត្ដរបស់ខ្លួន នៅគ្រប់ទីកន្លែង។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិឈប់សម្រាក និងលំហែកំសាន្ដ រួមបញ្ចូលទាំងកម្រិតម៉ោងការងារ សមហេតុផល និងការឈប់សម្រាក ដោយបានប្រាក់បៀវត្សតាមពេលកំណត់ទៀងទាត់។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូបមានសិទ្ធិចាកចេញពីប្រទេសណាមួយ រួមទាំងប្រទេសរបស់ខ្លួនផង និងមានសិទ្ធិវិលត្រឡប់មកប្រទេសរបស់ខ្លួនវិញ។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិបង្កើតសហជីព និងចូលរួមក្នុងសហជីព ដើម្បីការពារផលប្រយោជន៍របស់ខ្លួន។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប ទោះតែម្នាក់ឯងក្ដី ឬដោយរួមជាមួយអ្នកដទៃក្ដី មានសិទ្ធិជាម្ចាស់កម្មសិទ្ធិ។
__label__km មាតាបិតា មានសិទ្ធិជាអាទិភាព ក្នុងការជ្រើសរើសប្រភេទនៃការអប់រំ សម្រាប់បុត្រធីតារបស់ខ្លួន។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានករណីយកិច្ចចំពោះសហគមន៍ ដែលជាកន្លែងតែមួយគត់ ដែលអាចបង្កើតបានការរីកចម្រើនដោយសេរី និងពេញបរិបូរណ៍នូវបុគ្គលិកលក្ខណៈរបស់ខ្លួន។
__label__km ដោយយល់ឃើញថា ជាការចាំបាច់ ដែលត្រូវលើកស្ទួយការពង្រីកទំនាក់ទំនងជាមិត្ដភាព រវាង ប្រជាជាតិនានា។
__label__km គ្មានជនណាម្នាក់ ត្រូវបានបង្ខិតបង្ខំឱ្យចូលរួមក្នុងសមាគមណាមួយឡើយ។
__label__km ដោយយល់ឃើញថា ការយល់ដូចគ្នាមួយអំពីសិទ្ធិនិងសេរីភាពទាំងនេះ មានសារសំខាន់បំផុត ដើម្បីបំពេញនូវការសន្យាខាងលើ។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិធ្វើដំណើរដោយសេរី និងមានសិទ្ធិជ្រើសរើសនិវេសនដ្ឋានក្នុងរដ្ឋមួយ។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិស្វែងរក និងទទួលកន្លែងជ្រកកោន ក្នុងប្រទេសដទៃទៀត ក្នុងករណីមានការធ្វើទុក្ខបុកម្នេញមកលើខ្លួន។
__label__km គ្មានជនណាម្នាក់ ត្រូវបានចាប់ខ្លួន ឃុំខ្លួន ឬនិរទេសខ្លួន តាមអំពើចិត្ដឡើយ។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិចូលរួមក្នុងការដឹកនាំកិច្ចការសាធារណៈនៃប្រទេសរបស់ខ្លួន ដោយផ្ទាល់ ឬតាមរយៈតំណាង ដែលបានជ្រើសរើសដោយសេរី។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិមានការងារធ្វើ ជ្រើសរើសការងារដោយសេរី ទទួលលក្ខខណ្ឌការងារត្រឹមត្រូវ និងពេញចិត្ដ និងមានការការពារប្រឆាំងនឹងភាពអត់ការងារធ្វើ។
__label__km ជនណាដែលជាប់ចោទពីបទល្មើសព្រហ្មទណ្ឌ ត្រូវសន្មតជាជនគ្មានទោស រហូតដល់ពិរុទ្ធភាព ត្រូវបានរកឃើញ នៅក្នុងសវនាការជាសាធារណៈ ដែលមានការធានាចាំបាច់ ដើម្បីឱ្យជននោះការពារខ្លួន។
__label__km មាតុភាពនិងកុមារភាពមានសិទ្ធិទទួលជំនួយនិងការថែទាំពិសេស។ កុមារគ្រប់រូប ទោះកើតពីឪពុកម្ដាយមានខាន់ស្លា ឬឥតខាន់ស្លាក្ដី ត្រូវបានទទួលការពារខាងសង្គមកិច្ចដូចគ្នា។
__label__km ក្នុងឋានៈជាសមាជិកនៃសង្គម មនុស្សគ្រប់រូបមានសិទ្ធិទទួលបានសន្ដិសុខសង្គម និងមានបុព្វសិទ្ធិសម្រេចបានសិទ្ធិខាងសេដ្ឋកិច្ច សង្គមកិច្ច និងវប្បធម៌ ដែលចាំបាច់សម្រាប់សេចក្ដីថ្លៃថ្នូរ និងការរីកចំរើនដោយសេរីនៃបុគ្គលិកលក្ខណៈរបស់ខ្លួន តាមរយៈការខិតខំរបស់ជាតិ និងសហប្រតិបត្ដិការអន្ដរ ជាតិ និងដោយយោងទៅតាមការរៀបចំ និងធនធានរបស់ប្រទេសនីមួយៗ។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិស្មើគ្នាពេញលេញ សុំឱ្យតុលាការឯករាជ្យនិងមិនលំអៀង ពិនិត្យរឿងក្ដីរបស់ខ្លួនជាសាធារណៈ និងដោយសមធម៌ ដើម្បីសម្រេចលើសិទ្ធិនិងកាតព្វកិច្ច និងលើភាពសមហេតុផលនៃការចោទប្រកាន់ទាំងឡាយខាងបទព្រហ្មទណ្ឌមកលើខ្លួន។
__label__km ឆន្ទៈរបស់ប្រជាពលរដ្ឋ ជាមូលដ្ឋានអំណាចនៃការដឹកនាំកិច្ចការសាធារណៈ។ ឆន្ទៈនេះ ត្រូវសម្ដែងចេញតាមរយៈការបោះឆ្នោតទៀងទាត់ តាមពេលកំណត់ និងពិតប្រាកដ ដែលមានលក្ខណៈសកល ស្មើភាព និងសម្ងាត់់ ឬតាមនីតិវិធីសមមូល ដែលធានាសេរីភាពនៃការបោះឆ្នោត។
__label__km ដោយយល់ឃើញថា ជាការចាំបាច់ ដែលសិទ្ធិមនុស្សត្រូវតែបានការពារដោយនីតិរដ្ឋ ដើម្បីជៀសវាងកុំឱ្យមនុស្សបង្ខំចិត្ដជាចុងក្រោយបង្អស់ បះបោរប្រឆាំងទល់នឹងអំណាចផ្ដាច់ការ និងការគាបសង្កត់។
__label__km ដោយយល់ឃើញថា ការមិនទទួលស្គាល់ និងការប្រមាថមើលងាយសិទ្ធិមនុស្ស នាំឱ្យមានអំពើ ព្រៃផ្សៃសាហាវយង់ឃ្នង ធ្វើឱ្យក្ដៅក្រហាយដល់សតិសម្បជញ្ញៈមនុស្សជាតិ និងថា ការឈានដល់ពិភពលោកមួយ ដែលមនុស្សទាំងឡាយមានសេរីភាពក្នុងការនិយាយស្ដី និងជំនឿ និងភាពរួចផុតពីការភ័យ ខ្លាច និងទុគ៌តភាព ត្រូវបានប្រកាសថាជាសេចក្ដីប្រាថ្នាដ៏ខ្ពស់បំផុតរបស់មនុស្សទូទៅ។
__label__km មនុស្សម្នាក់ៗ អាចប្រើប្រាស់សិទ្ធិនិងសេរីភាពទាំងអស់ ដែលមានចែងក្នុងសេចក្ដីប្រកាសនេះ ដោយគ្មានការប្រកាន់បែងចែកបែបណាមួយ មានជាអាទិ៍ ពូជសាសន៍ ពណ៌សម្បុរ ភេទ ភាសា សាសនា មតិនយោបាយ ឬមតិផ្សេងៗទៀត ដើមកំណើតជាតិ ឬសង្គម ទ្រព្យសម្បត្ដិ កំណើត ឬស្ថានភាព ដទៃៗទៀតឡើយ។
__label__km មនុស្សទាំងអស់ កើតមកមានសេរីភាព និងសមភាព ក្នុងផ្នែកសេចក្ដីថ្លៃថ្នូរនិងសិទ្ធិ។ មនុស្ស មានវិចារណញ្ញាណនិងសតិសម្បជញ្ញៈជាប់ពីកំណើត ហើយគប្បីប្រព្រឹត្ដចំពោះគ្នាទៅវិញទៅមកក្នុងស្មារតីភាតរភាពជាបងប្អូន។
__label__km ដោយយល់ឃើញថា ប្រជាជាតិទាំងឡាយនៃសហប្រជាជាតិ បានប្រកាសបញ្ជាក់សារជាថ្មីក្នុង ធម្មនុញ្ញសហប្រជាជាតិ នូវជំនឿរបស់ខ្លួនទៅលើសិទ្ធិមូលដ្ឋាននៃមនុស្ស លើសេចក្ដីថ្លៃថ្នូរ លើតម្លៃរបស់ មនុស្ស និងលើសមភាពនៃសិទ្ធិរវាងបុរសនិងស្ដ្រី ហើយប្ដេជ្ញាលើកស្ទួយវឌ្ឍនភាពសង្គម និងកម្រិតជីវភាពរស់នៅឱ្យកាន់តែប្រសើរឡើង ក្នុងសេរីភាពកាន់តែទូលំទូលាយ។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិចូលរួមដោយសេរី ក្នុងជីវភាពវប្បធម៌របស់សហគមន៍ អាស្រ័យផល សិល្បៈ និងចូលរួមចំណែកក្នុងវឌ្ឍនភាពវិទ្យាសាស្ត្រ និងក្នុងផលប្រយោជន៍ដែលបានមកពីវឌ្ឍនភាពនេះ។
__label__km អ្នកធ្វើការងារ មានសិទ្ធិទទួលបានលាភការដោយសមធម៌ និងពេញចិត្ដ ដើម្បីធានាអត្ថិភាព រស់នៅរបស់ខ្លួននិងគ្រួសារ ឱ្យសមស្របនឹងសេចក្ដីថ្លៃថ្នូរនៃមនុស្ស និងត្រូវបានបំពេញបន្ថែមទៀត ដោយមធ្យោបាយផ្សេងៗនៃការការពារផ្នែកសង្គម ប្រសិនបើចាំបាច់។
__label__km ក្នុងការប្រើប្រាស់សិទ្ធិនិងសេរីភាពរបស់ខ្លួន មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប ត្រូវស្ថិតនៅត្រឹមតែកម្រិត ព្រំដែន ដែលច្បាប់បានកំណត់ សម្រាប់ធានាការទទួលស្គាល់ និងការគោរពសិទ្ធិ និងសេរីភាពរបស់អ្នកដទៃ និងបំពេញសេចក្ដីត្រូវការយ៉ាងត្រឹមត្រូវខាងសីលធម៌ សណ្ដាប់ធ្នាប់សាធារណៈ និងសុខុមាលភាពទូទៅ នៅក្នុងសង្គមប្រជាធិបតេយ្យតែប៉ុណ្ណោះ។
__label__km ជនគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិសេរីភាពខាងការគិត សតិសម្បជញ្ញៈ និងសាសនា។ សិទ្ធិនេះ រាប់បញ្ចូលទាំងសេរីភាពផ្លាស់ប្ដូរសាសនា ឬជំនឿ ព្រមទាំងសេរីភាពសម្ដែងសាសនា ឬជំនឿរបស់ខ្លួន តែម្នាក់ឯង ឬដោយរួមជាមួយអ្នកដទៃ ជាសាធារណៈ ឬជាឯកជន តាមការបង្ហាត់បង្រៀន ការអនុវត្ដ ការគោរព បូជា និងការប្រតិបត្ដិតាម។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិទទួលបានកម្រិតជីវភាពគ្រប់គ្រាន់ ដើម្បីធានាសុខភាព និង សុខុមាលភាពរបស់ខ្លួន និងគ្រួសារ រួមមានចំណីអាហារ សម្លៀកបំពាក់ លំនៅដ្ឋាន ការថែទាំសុខភាព និងសេវាសង្គមកិច្ចចាំបាច់ផ្សេងៗទៀត។ មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិទទួលបានការគាំពារនៅពេលគ្មាន ការងារធ្វើ មានជំងឺ ពិការ មេម៉ាយ ឬពោះម៉ាយ ចាស់ជរា ឬនៅពេលបាត់បង់មធ្យោបាយធានាជីវភាព ដែលបណ្ដាលមកពីកាលៈទេសៈផុតពីឆន្ទៈរបស់ខ្លួន។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិទទួលបានការអប់រំ។ ការអប់រំ ត្រូវឥតបង់ថ្លៃ យ៉ាងហោចណាស់ សម្រាប់ការអប់រំបឋមសិក្សា និងអប់រំមូលដ្ឋាន។ ការអប់រំបឋមសិក្សា គឺជាកាតព្វកិច្ច។ ការអប់រំ ខាងបច្ចេកទេស និងវិជ្ជាជីវៈ ត្រូវរៀបចំឱ្យមានជាទូទៅ។ ការអប់រំឧត្ដមសិក្សា ត្រូវបើកឱ្យចូលរៀន ស្មើភាពគ្នា ដោយឈរលើមូលដ្ឋានសមត្ថភាព។
__label__km គ្មានមនុស្សណាម្នាក់ ត្រូវរងការរំលោភជ្រៀតជ្រែកតាមអំពើចិត្ដក្នុងជីវិតឯកជន គ្រួសារ ទីលំនៅ ឬការឆ្លើយឆ្លង ឬការធ្វើឱ្យប៉ះពាល់ដល់កិត្ដិយស និងកេរ្ដិ៍ឈ្មោះរបស់ខ្លួនបានឡើយ។ ជនគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិទទួលការការពារពីច្បាប់ប្រឆាំងនឹងការជ្រៀតជ្រែក ឬការប៉ះពាល់បែបនេះ។
__label__km ការអប់រំ ត្រូវសំដៅទៅរកការរីកលូតលាស់ពេញលេញនៃបុគ្គលិកលក្ខណៈរបស់មនុស្ស និងការពង្រឹងការគោរពសិទ្ធិមនុស្ស និងសេរីភាពមូលដ្ឋាន។ ការអប់រំនេះ ត្រូវលើកកំពស់ការយល់ដឹង ការអត់ឱនអធ្យាស្រ័យគ្នា និងមិត្ដភាពរវាងប្រជាជាតិ និងក្រុមពូជសាសន៍ ឬក្រុមសាសនាទាំងអស់ ព្រមទាំងការអភិវឌ្ឍន៍សកម្មភាពរបស់សហប្រជាជាតិ ក្នុងការថែរក្សាសន្ដិភាព។
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិរកដំណោះស្រាយស័ក្ដិសិទ្ធិមួយនៅចំពោះមុខសាលាជំរះក្ដីជាតិ ដែលមានសមត្ថកិច្ចចំពោះអំពើទាំងឡាយណាដែលរំលោភសិទ្ធិមូលដ្ឋានរបស់ខ្លួន ដែលត្រូវបានទទួលស្គាល់ ដោយរដ្ឋធម្មនុញ្ញ ឬដោយច្បាប់។
__label__km មនុស្សប្រុសស្រីដល់អាយុគ្រប់ការ មានសិទ្ធិរៀបអាពាហ៍ពិពាហ៍ និងកសាងគ្រួសារ ដោយមិនប្រកាន់ពូជសាសន៍ សញ្ជាតិ ឬសាសនាឡើយ។ មនុស្សប្រុសស្រី មានសិទ្ធិស្មើគ្នាក្នុងការរៀបអាពាហ៍ពិពាហ៍ ក្នុងចំណងអាពាហ៍ពិពាហ៍ និងក្នុងពេលរំលាយចំណងអាពាហ៍ពិពាហ៍។
__label__km សិទ្ធិសុំជ្រកកោននេះ មិនអាចលើកមកសំអាងបានទេ ក្នុងករណីមានការចោទប្រកាន់ ដែលពិតជាកើតឡើងពីបទល្មើសមិនមែននយោបាយ ឬពីការប្រព្រឹត្ដណា ដែលផ្ទុយពីគោលបំណង និង គោលការណ៍ទាំងឡាយរបស់សហប្រជាជាតិ។
__label__km សេចក្ដីប្រកាសជាសកលស្ដីពីសិទ្ធិមនុស្សនេះ ជាឧត្ដមគតិរួមដែលប្រជាពលរដ្ឋគ្រប់ៗប្រទេស និង ប្រជាជាតិទាំងអស់ត្រូវធ្វើឱ្យបានសម្រេច ដើម្បីឱ្យបុគ្គលគ្រប់ៗរូប និងអង្គការសង្គមទាំងអស់ ដោយ រក្សាខ្ជាប់ជានិច្ចក្នុងស្មារតីរបស់ខ្លួន នូវសេចក្ដីប្រកាសនេះ ខិតខំប្រឹងប្រែងបណ្ដុះបណ្ដាលការគោរពសិទ្ធិ និងសេរីភាពទាំងនេះ តាមរយៈការបង្រៀននិងការអប់រំ ហើយនិងខំប្រឹង ប្រែងធានាឱ្យមានការទទួល ស្គាល់ និងការអនុវត្ដជាសកល និងដោយស័ក្ដិសិទ្ធិ នូវសិទ្ធិនិងសេរីភាព ដោយវិធានការជាតិ និងអន្ដរជាតិ ដែលមានលក្ខណៈរីកចម្រើនជាលំដាប់ ទាំងក្នុងចំណោមប្រជាពលរដ្ឋនៃរដ្ឋសមាជិក ទាំងក្នុងចំណោម ប្រជាពលរដ្ឋ ដែនដីដែលស្ថិតនៅក្រោមដែនសមត្ថកិច្ចនៃរដ្ឋទាំងនោះ។
__label__km អាស្រ័យហេតុនេះ មហាសន្និបាតប្រកាសថា ៖
__label__km មនុស្សគ្រប់រូប មានសិទ្ធិទទួលបានសញ្ជាតិមួយ។
__label__my အမှု—ကျောင်းကိုရည်ညွှန်း၍ လှူအပ်သော ပုဂ္ဂလိကပစ္စည်း, ကိုယ်တိုင်တောင်း၍ ရအပ်သော ပစ္စည်း ၂-မျိုးဖြင့် ဆေးကို လဲစေမှု။ အမှုသည်—ထုလ္လနန္ဒာ။ ထုလ္လနန္ဒာနှင့် မဟာရာဇာ ထုလ္လနန္ဒာသည် များသော အကြားအမြင်ရှိ၏၊ တရားတော်များကို အရဆောင်ထား၏၊ ရဲရင့်၏၊ တရားဟော ကောင်း၏၊ များစွာသော လူတို့သည် ထုလ္လနန္ဒာကို ဆည်းကပ်ကြလေ၏၊ ထိုအခါ၌ ထုလ္လနန္ဒာ၏ ကျောင်းသည် ပြိုကျနေ၏၊ လူတို့က “ဘာ့ကြောင့် ကျောင်းပြိုပါသနည်း”ဟု မေးလျှောက်သောအခါ ပြုပြင်မည့် ဒါယကာမရှိကြောင်းကို ပြောပြသဖြင့် ကျောင်းပြင်ဖို့ရာ သဘောတူသူ လူအများစုပေါင်း၍ ဆန်စသော ပရိက္ခရာကို ထုလ္လနန္ဒာအား လှူကြလေသည်၊ ထုလ္လနန္ဒာသည် ထိုလှူအပ်သောပရိက္ခရာ, မိမိကိုယ်တိုင်လည်း တောင်း၍ရသော ပရိက္ခရာ, ၂-မျိုးဖြင့် ကျောင်းမပြင်ဘဲ ဆေးကို လဲစေလေရာ, ထိုအကြောင်းကို ကြားသောလူတို့ ကဲ့ရဲ့သောကြောင့် ဤသိက္ခာပုဒ်ကို ပညတ်တော်မူရလေသည်။ သိက္ခာပုဒ် ယာ ပန ဘိက္ခုနီ အညဒတ္ထိကေန ပရိက္ခာရေန အညုဒ္ဒိသိကေန ပုဂ္ဂလိကေန သညာစိကေန အညံ စေတာပေယျ, နိဿဂ္ဂိယံ ပါစိတ္တိယံ။ မြန်မာပြန် အကြင်ဘိက္ခုနီသည် အခြားပစ္စည်းအတွက် လှူအပ်-အခြားပစ္စည်းကို ရည်ညွှန်း၍လှူအပ်သော မိမိပိုင်ပုဂ္ဂလိက ပရိက္ခရာ, ကိုယ်တိုင်တောင်း၍ ရအပ်သော ပရိက္ခရာ, ၂-မျိုးဖြင့် အလှူရှင် ရည်ညွှန်းအပ်သော ပရိက္ခရာမှ အခြားတစ်မျိုးကို လဲစေအံ့၊ ထိုဘိက္ခုနီမှာ နိဿဂ္ဂိ ပါစိတ်အာပတ်သင့်၏။ ကိုးကား ရဟန်းမိန်းမဝိနည်းများ
__label__my မယ်တလယ်ရွာ()သည် ကရင်ပြည်နယ်၊ ကော့ကရိတ်ခရိုင်၊ ကြာအင်းဆိပ်ကြီးမြို့နယ်၊ ခွိကလုံကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၂၀၉၉၃ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ခွိကလုံကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် အိမ်ခြေပေါင်း ၅၅၄ အိမ် ရှိကာ၊ လူဦးရေစုစုပေါင်း ၃၂၉၂ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ကြာအင်းဆိပ်ကြီးမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဗောဓိကုန်းရွာ ()သည် ပဲခူးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး (အရှေ့)၊ တောင်ငူခရိုင်၊ အုတ်တွင်းမြို့နယ်၊ တလုတ်ကုန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၀၉၅၄ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ တလုတ်ကုန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၈၀၁ ဦး၊ မ ၈၈၂ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၆၈၃ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား အုတ်တွင်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဆိမ် / ဒီဟိုင်ရွာ()သည် ချင်းပြည်နယ်၊ ဖလမ်းခရိုင်၊ ဖလမ်းမြို့နယ်၊ ဆိမ်/ဒီဟိုင်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၆၄၄၃၅ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ဆိမ်/ဒီဟိုင်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၃၄ ဦး၊ မ ၁၃၂ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၂၆၆ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ဖလမ်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ကျောက်ဖြူရွာ ()သည် မန္တလေးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး၊ ပြင်ဦးလွင်ခရိုင်၊ သပိတ်ကျင်းမြို့နယ်၊ ကျောက်လှည်းဘီးကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၁၈၂၂၉ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ကျောက်လှည်းဘီးကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၂၅၅ ဦး၊ မ ၁၀၆၉ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၂၃၂၄ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား သပိတ်ကျင်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my မွတ်ခရီးရွာ ()သည် ပဲခူးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး (အရှေ့)၊ ပဲခူးခရိုင်၊ ကျောက်တံခါးမြို့နယ်၊ ဂနက်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၇၉၁၂၂ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ဂနက်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၃၂၂၂ ဦး၊ မ ၃၈၅၇ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၇၀၇၉ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ကျောက်တံခါးမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my တင်ပုံကျင်းရွာ()သည် ချင်းပြည်နယ်၊ မင်းတပ်ခရိုင်၊ ကန်ပက်လက်မြို့နယ်၊ လုံအိမ်နူးကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၆၅၂၄၈ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ လုံအိမ်နူးကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၅၀၇ ဦး၊ မ ၅၄၆ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၀၅၃ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ကန်ပက်လက်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my နောင်ဘိုရွာ ()သည် ပဲခူးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး (အရှေ့)၊ တောင်ငူခရိုင်၊ တောင်ငူမြို့နယ်၊ အရှေ့ဆင်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၇၉၇၀၉ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ အရှေ့ဆင်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၅၈၄ ဦး၊ မ ၁၈၁၁ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၃၃၉၅ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား တောင်ငူမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ခိုလိုရွာ ()သည် ပဲခူးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး (အရှေ့)၊ ပဲခူးခရိုင်၊ ကျောက်တံခါးမြို့နယ်၊ သမင်အင်းကုန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၇၉၀၂၅ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ သမင်အင်းကုန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၃၃၁၀ ဦး၊ မ ၃၇၆၉ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၇၀၇၉ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ကျောက်တံခါးမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ပန်ခိုင်ရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (အရှေ့)၊ ကျိုင်းတုံခရိုင်၊ မိုင်းပျဉ်းမြို့နယ်၊ နမ့်ရှိုကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၁၄၃၆၂ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ နမ့်ရှိုကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၄၃၀ ဦး၊ မ ၁၃၃၉ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၂၇၆၉ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား မိုင်းပျဉ်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဆွန်ပလန်ရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (မြောက်)၊ ဝ ကိုယ်ပိုင်အုပ်ချုပ်ခွင့်ရတိုင်း၊ မက်မန်းခရိုင်၊ နားဖန်းမြို့နယ်၊ ဆီးဆောကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၀၇၅၅၅ ဖြစ်သည်။ ကိုးကား နားဖန်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my အရှင်ဗုဒ္ဓသညကထေရ် သည် မြတ်စွာဘုရား၏ သာသနာတော်ရှိ ရဟန်းတစ်ပါး ဖြစ်သည်။ ဘဝဇာတ်ကြောင်း တိဿမြတ်စွာဘုရားလက်ထက် တိဿမြတ်စွာဘုရား ၏ သင်္ကန်းတော်ကို သစ်ပင်ဖျားတွင် ချိတ်ဆွဲထား၏။ ထိုသို့ ချိတ်ဆွဲထားသည့် သင်္ကန်းကို အရှင်ဗုဒ္ဓသညကထေရ် သည် လက်အုပ်ချီမိုးရှိခိုးခဲ့၏။ အကျိုးခံစားရခြင်း ထိုသို့ ကိုးဆယ့်နှစ်ကမ္ဘာထက်တွင် ဘုရားရှင်၏ သင်္ကန်းတော်ကို ဖူးမြင်ခဲ့သည့် အချိန်မှစကာ အပါယ်လေးဘုံသို့ မရောက်ခဲ့ရပေ။ ထို့ပြင် လေးကမ္ဘာထက်တွင် “ဒုမသာရ” အမည်ဖြင့် စကြဝတေးမင်း ဖြစ်ခဲ့၏။ ဂေါတမမြတ်စွာဘုရားထက်ထက် နောက်ဆုံးဘဝတွင် ဂေါတမမြတ်စွာဘုရား၏ သာသနာတော်တွင် အရှင်ဗုဒ္ဓသညကထေရ် အဖြစ်ဖြင့် အာသဝေါကုန်ခမ်း ရဟန္တာ ဖြစ်တော်မူ၏။ ကိုးကား ဗုဒ္ဓဝင် ပုဂ္ဂိုလ်များ
__label__my ညောင်ရမ်းမြို့မရွာ ()သည် မန္တလေးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး၊ မိတ္ထီလာခရိုင်၊ သာစည်မြို့နယ်၊ ညောင်ရမ်းမြို့မကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၉၄၄၄၂ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ညောင်ရမ်းမြို့မကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၉၆၂ ဦး၊ မ ၁၁၁၅ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၂၀၇၇ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား သာစည်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ကော်ဘတ်ခြံရွာ()သည် ကရင်ပြည်နယ်၊ ဘားအံခရိုင်၊ သံတောင်ကြီးမြို့နယ်၊ ဇလဲကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၇၀၁၀၃ ဖြစ်သည်။ ​ကော်ဗတ်ခြံသည် မြစိမ်းရောင်ကျေးရွာစီမံကိန်း ၆၇ ရွာတွင် ပါဝင်သည်။ ကိုးကား သံတောင်ကြီးမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my (၁) ရက် (၂) ရက် (၃) ရက် (၄) ရက် (၅) ရက် (၆) ရက် (၇) ရက် (၈) ရက် (၉) ရက် (၁၀) ရက် (၁၁) ရက် (၁၂) ရက် (၁၃) ရက် (၁၄) ရက် (၁၅) ရက် (၁၆) ရက် (၁၇) ရက် (၁၈) ရက် (၁၉) ရက် (၂၀) ရက် (၂၁) ရက် (၂၂) ရက် (၂၃) ရက် (၂၄) ရက် (၂၅) ရက် (၂၆) ရက် (၂၇) ရက် (၂၈) ရက် (၂၉) ရက် (၃၀) ရက် ကိုးကား ဇွန် ၁၉၉၅
__label__my စူရာဟ် (; ; ; , ) ဆိုသည်မှာအစ္စလာမ်ဘာသာဝင်တို့၏ ဘုရားသခင်ဖြစ်တော်မူသော အလ္လာဟ်အရှင်မြတ်၏ ချပေးထားသည့် ကုရ်အာန်ကျမ်းတော်မြတ်၏ အခေါ်ဝေါ် ဖြစ်သည်။ ၎င်းသည် ကုရ်အာန်ကျမ်းတော်မြတ်၏ အပုဒ်လေးများဖြစ်၍ ၎င်းအပုဒ်ရေ (၁၁၄) ကိုစုပေါင်းလျှင် ကုရ်အာန်ကျမ်းတော်မြတ် တစ်အုပ်လုံးရရှိပေသည်။ ၎င်းကုရ်အာန်ကိုဖတ်ရွတ်သူသည် အလ္လာဟ်အရှင်မြတ်၏ နှစ်မျို့ဖွယ်ကိုရရှိသူဖြစ်ပြီး ၎င်းသူ၏ တောင်းဆုတော် (ဒိုအာ) မှန်သမျှကိုလည်း ဖြည့်ဆည်းပေးတော်မူသည်။ ကုရ်အာန်၏စူရာဟ် (၁၁၄) ပုဒ် စူရာဟ်ဖာသိဟ စူရာဟ်ဘကရာ စူရာဟ်အာလေအင်(မ်)ရာန် စူရာဟ်နေစာအေ့ ကိုးကားချက် အစ္စလာမ်ဘာသာ
__label__my ၁၉၇၄ ခုနှစ် အထွေထွေ ရွေးကောက်ပွဲ ကို ၁၉၇၄ ခုနှစ် ဇန်နဝါရီ ၂၇ ရက်မှ ဖေဖော်ဝါရီ ၁၀ ရက်နေ့အကြားတွင် ပြုလုပ်ခဲ့သည်။ ၁၉၇၃ ခုနှစ်တွင် ပြည်လုံးကျွတ် ဆန္ဒခံယူကာ အတည်ပြုခဲ့သော ဖွဲ့စည်းပုံ အခြေခံဥပဒေအရ ပြုလုပ်သည့် ပထမဆုံး ရွေးကောက်ပွဲ ဖြစ်သည်။ မြန်မာနိုင်ငံအား မြန်မာ့ဆိုရှယ်လစ်လမ်းစဉ်ပါတီ ဦးဆောင်သော တစ်ပါတီစနစ်အုပ်ချုပ်မှု စတင်ခဲ့ခြင်း ဖြစ်သည်။ ထို့ကြောင့် ပြည်သူ့လွှတ်တော် အမတ်နေရာ ၄၅၁ နေရာလုံး အနိုင်ရခဲ့သည်။ မဲပေးသူဦးရေမှာ ၉၄.၆% ရှိသည်ဟု ဆိုသည်။ ရလဒ်များ ကိုးကား ၁၉၇၄
__label__my ဇန်နဝါရီလ (၁) ရက်။ ဖေဖော်ဝါရီလ (၁) ရက်။ မတ်လ (၁) ရက်။ ဧပြီလ (၁) ရက်။ မေလ (၁) ရက်။ ဇွန်လ (၁) ရက်။ ဇူလိုင်လ (၁) ရက်။ ဩဂုတ်လ (၁) ရက်။ စက်တင်ဘာလ (၁) ရက်။ အောက်တိုဘာလ (၁) ရက်။ နိုဝင်ဘာလ (၂၅) ရက်။ ကမ္ဘာ့ကုလသမဂ္ဂ အထွေထွေအတွင်းရေးမှူးချုပ်ဟောင်းဦးသန့် ကွယ်လွန် ။ ဒီဇင်ဘာလ (၁) ရက်။ ကိုးကား ၁၉၇၄ ၁၉၇၀ ဆယ်စုနှစ်
__label__my ယင်ခံဝရွာ()သည် ချင်းပြည်နယ်၊ မတူပီခရိုင်၊ ပလက်ဝမြို့နယ်၊ ယင်ခံဝကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၆၅၄၂၅ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ယင်ခံဝကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၂၃၀ ဦး၊ မ ၂၂၁ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၄၅၁ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ပလက်ဝမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my မောက်စံရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (တောင်)၊ လွိုင်လင်ခရိုင်၊ လဲချားမြို့နယ်၊ ဟဲဆိုင်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၀၃၂၉၄ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ဟဲဆိုင်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၄၈၀ ဦး၊ မ ၅၀၃ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၉၈၃ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ဤရွာသည် တိမ်ကောသွားပြီ ဖြစ်သည်။ ကိုးကား လဲချားမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my လိုင်လင်းရွာ()သည် ချင်းပြည်နယ်၊ ဟားခါးခရိုင်၊ ထန်တလန်မြို့နယ်၊ လိုင်လင်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၆၄၆၁၆ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ လိုင်လင်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၅၀၆ ဦး၊ မ ၅၆၀ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၀၆၆ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ထန်တလန်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ကာဗွန်နစ်အက်ဆစ် () ဆိုသည်မှာ ရေထဲတွင် ကာဗွန်ဒိုင်အောက်ဆိုက်ဓာတ်ငွေ့ ပျော်ဝင်နေသည်ကို ခေါ်ဆိုသည်။ အမှန်အားဖြင့် ရှူရှိက်လေထဲတွင် ကာဗွန်နစ်အက်ဆစ်များ ပါဝင်သည်သာဖြစ်သည်။ နှစ်ကာလကြာရှည်လာသောအခါ ကျောက်လွှာမျက်နှာပြင်များသည်ပင် ၎င်းဓာတ်ကြောင့် သဘာဝပြောင်းလဲတတ်သည်။ ကိုးကား ဓာတုဗေဒ
__label__my မရိုးကုန်းရွာ ()သည် မန္တလေးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး၊ မြင်းခြံခရိုင်၊ ငါန်းဇွန်မြို့နယ်၊ မရိုးကုန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၉၂၂၇၉ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ မရိုးကုန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၄၅၉ ဦး၊ မ ၆၁၈ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၀၇၇ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ငါန်းဇွန်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဝမ်ပေါင်ရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (အရှေ့)၊ ကျိုင်းတုံခရိုင်၊ မိုင်းပျဉ်းမြို့နယ်၊ နမ့်ရှိုကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၁၄၃၇၀ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ နမ့်ရှိုကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၄၃၀ ဦး၊ မ ၁၃၃၉ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၂၇၆၉ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ဤရွာသည် တိမ်ကောသွားပြီ ဖြစ်သည်။ ကိုးကား မိုင်းပျဉ်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဘန့်ကွန်ရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (တောင်)၊ ပအိုဝ်း ကိုယ်ပိုင်အုပ်ချုပ်ခွင့်ရဒေသ၊ ဟိုပုံးမြို့နယ်၊ စံဖူး (မဲနယ်တောင်)ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၀၀၈၃၂ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ စံဖူး (မဲနယ်တောင်)ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၃၅၂၉ ဦး၊ မ ၃၉၁၄ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၇၄၄၃ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ဟိုပုံးမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my နော့ဘတ်တာဒါ ဆာဂျီ ကို ၁၉၄၅ ခုနှစ် နိုဝင်ဘာ ၂၅ တွင်မွေးဖွားခဲ့ပြီး ဂျပန်နိုင်ငံ စတုတ္ထအကြီးဆုံး အရက်နှင့်စားသောက်ကုန် ထုတ်လုပ်မှုလုပ်ငန်းဖြစ်သည့် Suntory လိမိတက်၏ အမှုဆောင်ချုပ်၊ ဂျပန်လူမျိုး စီးပွားရေးလုပ်ငန်းရှင်တစ်ဦးဖြစ်သည်။ သူသည် ပျမ်းမျှငွေကြေးပမာဏ ၆.၉ ဘီလျံဒေါ်လာဖြင့် ၂၀၀၄ ခုနှစ်အတွက် အချမ်းသာဆုံး တစ်သီးပုဂ္ဂလတစ်ဦးဖြစ်ခဲ့သော်လည်း ၂၀၀၆ ခုနှစ် ဇွန်လ၏ Forbes စစ်တမ်းများအရ ငွေကြေးပမာဏ ၅ ဘီလျံဒေါ်လာဖြင့် သူ့ကို စတုတ္ထအချမ်းသာဆုံးနေရာကို လျှော့ချခဲ့သည်။ သူသည် MBA ဘွဲ့ကို လော့စ်အိန်ဂျလိစ် ရှိ ကယ်လ်လီဖိုးနီးယားတက္ကသိုလ်မှ ရရှိခဲ့ပြီး ၂၀၀၁ ခုနှစ်တွင် Suntory ၏ အမှုဆောင်ချုပ်ရာထူးကို ရရှိခဲ့သည်။ သူသည် Hyogo Prefecture တွင် နေထိုင်လျက်ရှိသည်။ အပိုဆောင်းကြည့်ရှုစရာများ Forbes.com: Forbes World's Richest People သန်းကြွယ်သူဌေးများ
__label__my ဝမ်မုံရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (အရှေ့)၊ ကျိုင်းတုံခရိုင်၊ ကျိုင်းတုံမြို့နယ်၊ မိုင်းဇင်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၂၂၀၅၆ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ မိုင်းဇင်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၈၂၁၅ ဦး၊ မ ၈၀၉၃ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၆၃၀၈ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ကျိုင်းတုံမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my မာန်မြေ (အနောက်စု)ရွာ ()သည် မကွေးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး၊ မကွေးခရိုင်၊ ရေနံချောင်းမြို့နယ်၊ မာန်မြေကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၄၉၄၈ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ မာန်မြေကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၂၁၈၅ ဦး၊ မ ၂၅၉၈ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၄၇၈၃ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ရေနံချောင်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဇီးပင်လှရွာ ()သည် ပဲခူးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး (အနောက်)၊ ပြည်ခရိုင်၊ ပေါင်းတည်မြို့နယ်၊ နွားခြံကုန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၁၈၃၈ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ နွားခြံကုန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၄၈၄ ဦး၊ မ ၁၆၆၀ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၃၁၄၄ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ပေါင်းတည်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဟောင်ကောင်တွင် ဖြစ်ခဲ့သော ပုဂ္ဂလိ ပိုင်ဆိုင်မှုဆိုင်ရာ ဈေးနှုန်းများ ထိုးကျသွားချိန် မတိုင်မီတွင် အိမ်ရာခြံမြေလုပ်ငန်းများ၏ ဈေးကွက် ဝရုန်းသုန်းကား ပျက်သွားခဲ့သည်။ ထိုသို့ ပြောစမှတ်ပြု ဝရုန်းသုန်းကား ဈေးကွက် ပျက်သွားသော လုပ်ငန်းမိသားစုများထဲမှ တစ်ခုဖြစ်သည်။ ပြီးခဲ့သည့် မေ လတွင် အငယ်နှစ်ယောက်ဖြစ်သည့် Thomas နှင့် Raymond တို့၏ သဘောထားကွဲလွဲမှုများ အပြီးတွင် အကြီးဆုံး အကိုဖြစ်သူ Walter မှာ ၁၈နှစ်ကြာ လုပ်ခဲ့သော Sun Hung Kai လုပ်ငန်းစု၏ ဥက္ကဋ္ဌ ရာထူးမှပြုတ်သွားခဲ့ သည်။ မိခင်ဖြစ်သူ Kwong Siu-hing က ဥက်ကဌ ရာထူးကို လွှဲပြောင်းရယူခဲ့သည်။ ဇန်နဝါရီလတွင် ဟောင်ကောင်၌ “W” ဟိုတယ်ကို ဖွင့်လှစ်ခဲ့သည်။ ကော့ခ် မိသားစု သည် ဆက်သွယ်ရေးနှင့် နည်းပညာ လုပ်ငန်းများဖြစ်သော SmarTone-Vodafone နှင့် စီးတီး ဘက်စ်ကား ကုမ္ပဏီ တစ်ခုဖြစ်သော KMB တို့၌လည်း ရင်းနှီးမြုပ်နှံဖို့ စိတ်ဝင်စားမှု ရှိကြသည်။ သန်းကြွယ်သူဌေးများ
__label__my ဆာကေး (အင်္ဂလိပ် Sake ဂျပန်။ 酒) ကို ဂျပန်ဆန်အရက်ဟုလည်း ခေါ်ကြပြီး ဖွဲနုပြောင်အောင် ပေါလစ်တင်ထားသော ဆန်အား ကစော်ဖောက်ခြင်းမှ ရရှိသော အရက်တစ်မျိုး ဖြစ်သည်။ ဝိုင်အရက်နှင့် မတူသော အချက်မှာ ဝိုင်အရက်သည် သစ်သီးတွင် သဘာဝအတိုင်း ပါဝင် သော သကြားအား ကစော်ဖောက်ခြင်းမှ ရရှိပြီး ဆာကေးအရက်မှာမူ ဘီယာကဲ့သို့ ချက်လုပ်ခြင်းမှ ရသည်။ ကစီဓာတ်များအား သကြားအဖြစ်ပြောင်းလဲ၍ ထိုမှတဆင့် ကစော်ဖောက်ခြင်း ဖြစ်သည်။ ဆာကေးအရက်ချက်ခြင်းနှင့် ဘီယာချက်ခြင်းတို့ ကြား ကွာခြားချက်မှာ ဘီယာချက်လုပ်ရာတွင် ကစီဓာတ်ကို ပထမအဆင့်တွင် သကြားအဖြစ်ပြောင်းလဲ၍ ဒုတိယအဆင့်တွင် သကြားမှ အရက်အဖြစ်သို့ ပြောင်းလဲသည်။ ဆာကေးမှာမူ အခြားသော ဆန်အရက်များကဲ့သို့ပင် ကစီဓာတ်မှ အရက်သို့ ပြောင်းလဲခြင်းအား တစ်ချိန်တည်း တစ်ပြိုင်တည်းတွင် ပြုလုပ်သည်။ ထို့အပြင် ဆာကေး၊ ဝိုင်နှင့် ဘီယာတို့တွင် အရက်ပါဝင်မှု အချိုးအစား ကွာခြားသည်။ ဝိုင်များတွင် ယေဘုယျအားဖြင့် အရက် ၉% မှ ၁၆% ပါဝင်လေ့ရှိပြီး ဘီယာအများစုတွင်မူ အရက် ၃% မှ ၉% အထိပါဝင်ကာ ဆာကေးတွင်မူ အရက် ၁၈% မှ ၂၀%အထိ ပါဝင်လေ့ရှိသည်။ (သို့သော်လည်း အမြဲလိုလိုပင် ပုလင်းမသွတ်မီ ၁၅% အထိ ရေရောခြင်းဖြင့် ဆာကေး၏ အရက်ပါဝင်မှုကို လျှော့ချကြသည်။ ကိုးကား ဂျပန် ဝေါဟာရများ
__label__my ဝါယောရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (မြောက်)၊ ကိုးကန့် ကိုယ်ပိုင်အုပ်ချုပ်ခွင့်ရဒေသ၊ ကုန်းကြမ်းမြို့နယ်၊ တာကုန်းကြမ်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၁၁၇၃၁ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ တာကုန်းကြမ်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၅၉၈၈ ဦး၊ မ ၅၆၅၄ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၁၆၄၂ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ဤရွာသည် တိမ်ကောသွားပြီ ဖြစ်သည်။ ကိုးကား ကုန်းကြမ်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my တောင်ပေါ် (တောင်)ရွာ ()သည် မန္တလေးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး၊ ညောင်ဦးခရိုင်၊ ကျောက်ပန်းတောင်းမြို့နယ်၊ တောင်ပေါ် (တောင်)ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၉၁၈၆၇ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ တောင်ပေါ် (တောင်)ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၆၄၉ ဦး၊ မ ၈၀၆ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၄၅၅ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ကျောက်ပန်းတောင်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဂဲပင်အင်းရွာ ()သည် မကွေးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး၊ ပခုက္ကူခရိုင်၊ ပေါက်မြို့နယ်၊ စသိန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၈၈၇၈ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ စသိန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၄၆၈ ဦး၊ မ ၁၈၆၈ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၃၃၃၆ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ပေါက်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ရွှေကူရွာ ()သည် မန္တလေးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး၊ မိတ္ထီလာခရိုင်၊ ဝမ်းတွင်းမြို့နယ်၊ ဆင်ချီတိုင်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၉၄၅၆၆ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ဆင်ချီတိုင်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၂၁၅ ဦး၊ မ ၁၃၄၈ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၂၅၆၃ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ဝမ်းတွင်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my မိုးမှောက်ကျရွာ ()သည် ပဲခူးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး (အနောက်)၊ ပြည်ခရိုင်၊ ပြည်မြို့နယ်၊ ဝါးရုံဆိပ်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၁၁၀၄ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ဝါးရုံဆိပ်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၄၂၀ ဦး၊ မ ၁၅၅၄ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၂၉၇၄ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ပြည်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ကြည်း ၁၄၇၅၁ ဒုတိယဗိုလ်ချုပ်ကြီးအောင်သန်းထွဋ်သည် စစ်တက္ကသိုလ် အပတ်စဉ်(၂၀) ဗိုလ်လောင်းသင်တန်းမှ အရာရှိတစ်ဦးဖြစ်ပြီး ယခင်က အရှေ့မြောက်ပိုင်းတိုင်းစစ်ဌာနချုပ် တိုင်းမှူး တာဝန် ထမ်းဆောင်ခဲ့ဖူးသူဖြစ်သည်။ ယခုအခါ အမှတ် (၂) စစ်ဆင်ရေး အထူးအဖွဲ့မှူး အဖြစ် တာဝန်ထမ်းဆောင်လျက်ရှိသည်။ မြန်မာ စစ်ဖက်ဆိုင်ရာ လူပုဂ္ဂိုလ်များ
__label__my ဂုံမင်းကွင်း (မြောက်စု)ရွာ ()သည် ပဲခူးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး (အနောက်)၊ သာယာဝတီခရိုင်၊ လက်ပံတန်းမြို့နယ်၊ ဂုံမင်းကွင်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၃၀၆၂ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ဂုံမင်းကွင်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၉၁၂ ဦး၊ မ ၁၀၈၃ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၉၉၅ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား လက်ပံတန်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ကြက်တောကြီး(ပြာဝါ)သည် အရွယ်အစားကြီးမားသော တောင်အမေရိက ကြက်တူရွေးတစ်မျိုး ဖြစ်သည်။ ကိုယ်အပေါ်ပိုင်းတွင် အပြာရောင်ရှိပြီး ကိုယ် အောက်ပိုင်းတွင် အဝါရောင် ရှိသည်။ မကောကြက်တူရွေး (သို့မဟုတ်) ကြက်တောကြီးအနွယ်ဝင် ဖြစ်သည်။ အပူပိုင်းတောင်အမေရိကတိုက်ရှိ တောအုပ်များ၊ သစ်တောများနှင့် ဆာဗားနားမြက်ခင်းပြင်များတွင် တွေ့ရသည်။ ယင်းတို့ ၏ ထူးခြားလှပသောအရောင်အသွေးနှင့် စကားပြောနိုင်စွမ်းတို့ကြောင့် အလှမွေးငှက်လောကတွင် လူသိများသည်။ သိပ္ပံအမည်မှာ အေရာ အေရာရာအူနာ ဖြစ် သည်။ ပုံများ ကိုးကား မကောကြက်တူရွေးများ စကားပြောသော ငှက်များ ဘရာဇီးနိုင်ငံတွင် တွေ့ရှိရသော ငှက်များ
__label__my (၂)သုတ်ရှိပါသည်။ သတိပဋ္ဌာန် လေးပါးတို့၌ ကောင်း (စွဲမြဲစွာတည်သော စိတ်ရှိကုန်သည်ဖြစ်၍ နေကြကုန်လော့၊ သင်တို့၏ အမြိုက်နိဗ္ဗာန်သည် မပျက်စီးစေပါလင့်-ဟု သတိပဋ္ဌာန် ၄-ပါး ပွားများပုံကို တစ်ပါးစီ တစ်ပါးစီ အသီးအသီး ဟောတော်မူသည့်သုတ်။ သမာပတ် ၈-ပါးနှင့်တကွ အရဟတ္တဖိုလ်သည် “အမတ” မည်ကြောင်း ကောသမ္ဗီမြို့ ဃောသိတာရုံကျောင်းတော်၌ အရှင်ကာဠုဒါယီ၏ လျှောက်ထားချက် အရ အရှင်အာနန္ဒာထေရ် ဟောတော်မူသည့်သုတ်။ ကိုးကား သံယုတ္တနိကာယ်အင်္ဂုတ္တရနိကာယ်
__label__my ၁၄၇၃ ၁၄၇၃ ခုနှစ် မှတ်တမ်း ဇန်နဝါရီလ (၁) ရက်။ ဖေဖော်ဝါရီလ (၁) ရက်။ မတ်လ (၁) ရက်။ ဧပြီလ (၁) ရက်။ မေလ (၁) ရက်။ ဇွန်လ (၁) ရက်။ ဇူလိုင်လ (၁) ရက်။ ဩဂုတ်လ (၁) ရက်။ စက်တင်ဘာလ (၁) ရက်။ အောက်တိုဘာလ (၁) ရက်။ နိုဝင်ဘာလ (၁) ရက်။ ဒီဇင်ဘာလ (၁) ရက်။ ၁၄၇၃ ခုနှစ်များ
__label__my စမ်းဘုတ်ရွာ ()သည် ပဲခူးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး (အနောက်)၊ သာယာဝတီခရိုင်၊ မင်းလှမြို့နယ်၊ စမ်းဘုတ်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၃၂၉၉ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ စမ်းဘုတ်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၆၃၂ ဦး၊ မ ၆၈၃ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၃၁၅ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား အောက်မင်းလှမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my နမ့်ဟာရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (မြောက်)၊ မူဆယ်ခရိုင်၊ မူဆယ်မြို့နယ်၊ ပန်လွမ်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၀၈၂၂၂ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ပန်လွမ်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၅၆၇ ဦး၊ မ ၅၁၈ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၀၈၅ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား မူဆယ်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my သရက်ကုန်းရွာ()သည် မွန်ပြည်နယ်၊ မော်လမြိုင်ခရိုင်၊ ကျိုက်မရောမြို့နယ်၊ ကဒါကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၉၄၉၉၂ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ကဒါကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၃၈၂၅ ဦး၊ မ ၄၃၀၈ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၈၁၃၃ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ကျိုက်မရောမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my အဝိဇ္ဇာနီဝရဏဖြင့် တားမြစ်ပိတ်ပင်ခံရသော သတ္တဝါတို့သည် ရှည်မြင့်စွာသော နေ့ညဉ့်တို့ပတ်လုံး သံသရာ၌ ပြေးသွား ကျင်လည်ကြရကုန်၏ဟု ဘုရားရှင် ဟောတော်မူကြောင်းကို ခုဇ္ဇုတ္တရာက သာမာဝတီအမှူးရှိသော မိဖုရားတို့အား ဟောကြားသည့်သုတ်။ အဋ္ဌကထာ၌ -သန္ဓာဝနနှင့် သံသရဏတို့ထူးခြားပုံ၊ အဝိဇ္ဇာနီဝရဏ၏ အစွမ်းသတ္တိကြောင့် ကာမစ္ဆန္ဒအစရှိသော နီဝရဏတို့ ဖြစ်ပုံ၊ သံသရာ၏ မူလအကြောင်းသည် အဝိဇ္ဇာဖြစ်ပုံ အစရှိသည်တို့ကို ဖွင့်ပြထားပါသည်။ ကိုးကား ခုဒ္ဒကနိကာယ်
__label__my ဝေါ့လပ်ရွာ()သည် ချင်းပြည်နယ်၊ ဖလမ်းခရိုင်၊ တီးတိန်မြို့နယ်၊ ဘွင်မံကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၆၄၇၁၇ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ဘွင်မံကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၂၇၀ ဦး၊ မ ၃၃၄ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၆၀၄ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား တီးတိန်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဝမ်တာရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (တောင်)၊ လွိုင်လင်ခရိုင်၊ နမ့်စန်မြို့နယ်၊ ခိုအွတ်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၀၃၆၉၆ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ခိုအွတ်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၂၆၀၅ ဦး၊ မ ၂၄၇၇ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၅၀၈၂ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ဤရွာသည် တိမ်ကောသွားပြီ ဖြစ်သည်။ ကိုးကား နမ့်စန်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my အင်းသာယာရွာ ()သည် ပဲခူးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး (အနောက်)၊ သာယာဝတီခရိုင်၊ လက်ပံတန်းမြို့နယ်၊ ရေကြည်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၃၂၃၂ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ရေကြည်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၂၃၈၀ ဦး၊ မ ၂၅၀၀ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၄၈၈၀ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား လက်ပံတန်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my စာပုတောင်ရွာ()သည် ချင်းပြည်နယ်၊ မတူပီခရိုင်၊ ပလက်ဝမြို့နယ်၊ ဝက်မကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၆၅၅၄၄ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ဝက်မကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၈၂၇ ဦး၊ မ ၈၄၉ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၆၇၆ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ပလက်ဝမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my Fiber to the Xစနစ်ဟာ ဘယ်broadband network ဖွဲ့စည်းပုံနဲ့မဆို ကောင်းမွန်တဲ့အရာတစ်ခုဖြစ်ပြီးOptical fiber အသုံးပြုပါတယ်။ ဒီလိုအသုံးပြုထားတာက Last mile telecommunication တွေအတွက် သာမန်သုံးနေကျ သတ္ထုLocal loop ကို အစားထိုးနေရာ ယူလာတာဖြစ်ပါတယ်။ FTTN , FTTC,FTTB, FTTH နဲ့ FTTH စတဲ့ X တစ်လုံးကိုဖြည့်ပြီး Fiber မျိုးဆက်ကို တဖြည်းဖြည်း Configurate လုပ်ယူလာတာ ဖြစ်ပါတယ်။ နည်းပညာ ကွန်ပျူတာ
__label__my ဆွတ်ဝနိုမြို့ (津和野町 ဆွတ်ဝနို− ချေား ) သည် ဂျပန်နိုင်ငံ၊ ရှိမနဲခရိုင်၊ ခနိုအရှိတိုင်းတွင် တည်ရှိသည်။ ၂၀၁၇ ခုနှစ်၊ မတ်လတွင် မြို့နေလူဦးရေသည် ၇၄၇၈ ဦး ရှိသည်။ လူဦးရေသိပ်သည်းဆသည် တစ်စတုရန်းကီလိုမီတာလျှင် ၂၅.၀ ဦး ရှိသည်။ စုစုပေါင်း ဧရိယာသည် ၃၀၇.၀၉ စတုရန်းကီလိုမီတာ ကျယ်ဝန်းသည်။ ကိုးကား ဂျပန်နိုင်ငံရှိ မြို့များ
__label__my သမ္မတအိမ်တော် အဆောက်အဦးသည် တရုတ်သမ္မတနိုင်ငံ (အာအိုစီ) သမ္မတ ရုံးတက်ရာ ဌာနဖြစ်သည်။ ယင်းအဆောက်အဦးအား ဂျပန်ကိုလိုနီခေတ် (၁၈၉၅-၁၉၄၅) တွင် ဂျပန်ဗိသုကာပညာရှင် အုဟဲအိဂျိ နာဂနိုက ပုံစံရေးဆွဲခဲ့သည်။ မူလက ထိုင်ဝမ်ဘုရင်ခံ၏ ရုံးတော်အဖြစ် တည်ဆောက်ခဲ့ခြင်း ဖြစ်သည်။ ဒုတိယကမ္ဘာစစ်ကြီးအတွင်း မဟာမိတ်တပ်တို့၏ ဗုံးကျဲတိုက်ခိုက်မှုကြောင့် ပျက်စီးခဲ့သည်။ စစ်ကြီးပြီးနောက် ထိုင်ဝမ်ပြည်နယ်မှူး ချန်ယိက ပြန်လည် ပြုပြင်ဆောက်လုပ်ခဲ့သည်။ ကွန်မင်တန်အစိုးရ တရုတ်ပြည်တွင်းစစ်ပွဲတွင် ရှုံးနှိမ့်ကာ ထိုင်ဝမ်သို့ ပြောင်းရွှေ့လာပြီးနောက် ၁၉၅၀ ခုနှစ်တွင် ယင်းအဆောက်အဦးအား သမ္မတအိမ်တော်အဖြစ် အသုံးပြုခဲ့သည်မှာ ယနေ့အထိတိုင် ဖြစ်သည်။ ထိုင်ဝမ် သမ္မတ အိမ်တော်များ ထိုင်ပေမြို့ အဆောက်အဦး တရုတ်သမ္မတနိုင်ငံ
__label__my လက်ကိုင်အိတ်ဆောင် မှန်ဘီလူး (Hand len) သည် ကျောက်မျက် ရတနာတို့၏ အရည်အသွေးကို စစ်ဆေးရာတွင် အခြေခံကျပြီး အလွန်ပင်ထိရောက်၊ အလွန်ပင်အသုံးဝင်သည့် ကိရိယာဖြစ်သည်။ ၎င်းကိရိယာကို မှန်ဘီလူး တစ်ချပ် (သို့) တစ်ချပ်ထက်ပိုသော မှန်ဘီလူးတွဲများဖြင့် ပြုလုပ်ထားသည်။ ဆယ်ဆချဲ့မှန်ဘီလူးကို ရွေးချယ်ဝယ်ယူရာတွင် အဓိကအားဖြင့် စစ်ဆေးသင့်သည်များမှာ- အရောင်သွေဖည်မှု (no chromatic aberration) မှန်ဘီလူးခုံး၏ မျက်နှာပြင်ညီညာမှု (no spherical distortion) တို့ဖြစ်ကြသည်။ ကျောက်မျက်ရတနာ ကျောက်မျက်ရတနာ အရည်အသွေးစစ် ကိရိယာများ
__label__my ESO 510-G13 သည် ဟိုက်ဒရာ ကြယ်စုတန်းမှ ခရုပတ်ပုံစံ ဂယ်လက်ဆီဖြစ်ပြီး အခြားဂယ်လက်ဆီတစ်ခုဖြင့် ဆက်စပ်နေသည်ဟု ညွန်ပြနေသည်။ ယင်းဂယ်လက်ဆီအား ၂၀၀၁ ခုနှစ်တွင် ဟာဘယ် အာကာသ တယ်လီစကုပ်ဖြင့် လေ့လာစစ်ဆေးခဲ့သည်။ ပြင်ပလင့်များ HST: Warped Galaxy SIMBAD: ESO 510-13 -- Galaxy Hubble Photographs Warped Galaxy as Camera Passes Milestone ကိုးကား ဟိုက်ဒရာ (ကြယ်စုတန်း)
__label__my ဝဲကြီးရွာ()သည် မွန်ပြည်နယ်၊ သထုံခရိုင်၊ ဘီးလင်းမြို့နယ်၊ ကျောက်ရေတွင်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၉၅၉၇၅ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ကျောက်ရေတွင်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၈၃၉ ဦး၊ မ ၁၉၁၆ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၃၇၅၅ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ဘီးလင်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဆင်ဖြူတောင်စေတီသည် ပျဉ်းမနားမြို့ အရှေ့မြောက်ဘက် ၇ မိုင်အကွာ ပေါင်းလောင်းမြစ် အရှေ့ဘက် ကူးတို့ဆိပ်ကျေးရွာတွင် တည်ရှိသည်။ သမိုင်းဝင်စေတီတဆူ ဖြစ်ကာ နှစ်စဉ် ဘုရားပွဲတော်ကို စည်ကားသိုက်မြိုက်စွာ ကျင်းပသည်။ ကိုးကား မြန်မာနိုင်ငံရှိ စေတီပုထိုးများ
__label__my အုတ်တိုက်ရွာ ()သည် မန္တလေးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး၊ ပြင်ဦးလွင်ခရိုင်၊ မတ္တရာမြို့နယ်၊ ဆိပ်သာကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၉၉၆၁ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ဆိပ်သာကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၈၆၈ ဦး၊ မ ၁၉၁၀ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၃၇၇၈ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား မတ္တရာမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဆာဒူးရွာ ()သည် ပဲခူးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး (အရှေ့)၊ ပဲခူးခရိုင်၊ ကျောက်တံခါးမြို့နယ်၊ ကျေးရိုးကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၇၉၁၀၅ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ကျေးရိုးကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၂၀၆၉ ဦး၊ မ ၂၂၉၆ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၄၃၆၅ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ကျောက်တံခါးမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ကရင်လှိုင်ရွာ()သည် မွန်ပြည်နယ်၊ မော်လမြိုင်ခရိုင်၊ ကျိုက်မရောမြို့နယ်၊ ကြီးအုပ်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၉၅၀၃၀ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ကြီးအုပ်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၂၂၀ ဦး၊ မ ၁၃၃၆ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၂၅၅၆ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ကျိုက်မရောမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ပိုင်ဒဝယ်ရွာ()သည် မွန်ပြည်နယ်၊ သထုံခရိုင်၊ ဘီးလင်းမြို့နယ်၊ ပိုင်ဒဝယ်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၉၆၁၁၁ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ပိုင်ဒဝယ်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၀၃၂ ဦး၊ မ ၉၅၉ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၉၉၁ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ဘီးလင်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my နားဒိုက်ရွာ()သည် ကရင်ပြည်နယ်၊ ဘားအံခရိုင်၊ လှိုင်းဘွဲ့မြို့နယ်၊ တဝန်ဖန်ရကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ တဝန်ဖန်ရကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် အိမ်ခြေပေါင်း အိမ်ရှိကာ၊ လူဦးရေစုစုပေါင်း ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား လှိုင်းဘွဲ့မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my အင်းဝန်းရွာ ()သည် ပဲခူးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး (အနောက်)၊ ပြည်ခရိုင်၊ ပန်းတောင်းမြို့နယ်၊ ဆင်တဲကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၁၅၈၆ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ဆင်တဲကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၄၉၂၄ ဦး၊ မ ၅၄၃၄ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၀၃၅၈ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ပန်းတောင်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဟာဘီတို သည် မျိုးရိုးနာမည် ဖြစ်သည်။ နာမည်ရှိသူများမှာ စီအလီတို ဟာဘီတို၊ :en:Cielito Habito (၁၉၅၃ မွေး), ဖိလစ်ပိုင် စီးပွားရေးပညာရှင်၊ ပညာရေးသမားနှင့် ဂျာနယ်လစ် ရူဘင် ဟာဘီတို၊ :en:Ruben Habito (၁၉၄၇ ခန့်မွေး), ဖီလစ်ပိုင် ဇင်ဗုဒ္ဓဘာသာဝင်နှင့် စာရေးဆရာ မျိုးရိုးနာမည်များ
__label__my ရုံးခုံရွာ ()သည် ပဲခူးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး (အနောက်)၊ ပြည်ခရိုင်၊ ပန်းတောင်းမြို့နယ်၊ ပဲကြီးကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၁၇၁၃ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ပဲကြီးကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၁၈၁ ဦး၊ မ ၁၃၄၅ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၂၅၂၆ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ပန်းတောင်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ပြင်းအား ၇.၉ ရှိတဲ့ ငလျင်ဟာ တရုတ်နိုင်ငံ အနောက်တောင်ပိုင်း စီချွမ်ပြည်နယ်နဲ့ အိမ်နီးချင်း ပြည်နယ်နှစ်ခုမှာ ၂၀၀၈မေလ ၁၃ ရက် ဒေသစံတော်ချိန်မွန်းလွဲ ၂ နာရီ ၂၈ မိနစ်မှာ လှုပ်ခတ်ခဲ့တာ ဖြစ်ပါတယ်။ လူ ၈၀,၀၀၀ ကျော်သေဆုံးပြီး ၅၀,၀၀၀ ကျော် အိုးမဲ့အိမ်မဲ့ ဖြစ်ခဲ့ရတဲ့ ငလျင်လှုပ်ခဲ့တာ တနှစ်ပြည့်တဲ့ နှစ်ပတ်လည်နေ့ အထိမ်းအမှတ် အခမ်းအနားမှာ တရုတ်သမ္မတ ဟူဂျင်တောင်းက ငလျင်ကြောင့် တနိုင်ငံလုံး အတူတကွစည်းစည်းလုံးလုံးနဲ့ ဒုက္ခတွေကို မျှဝေခဲ့ကြတဲ့အထိမ်းအမှတ်အဖြစ် မေလ ၁၂ ရက်နေ့ကို တရုတ်နိုင်ငံရဲ့ သဘာဝ ဘေးအန္တရာယ်ကာကွယ်ရေးနဲ့ လျော့ပါးရေးနေ့အဖြစ်သတ်မှတ်လိုက်ပါတယ်။ တရုတ်နိုင်ငံ စီချွမ်ပြည်နယ် ငလျင်ဘေးသင့် ဒုက္ခသည်တွေကို ချက်ချင်းဆိုသလို အကူအညီတွေ ပေးနိုင်ခဲ့လို့ နိုင်ငံတကာအသိုင်းအဝန်းက ချီးကျူးခဲ့ကြပါတယ်။ ဒါပေမယ့် ဖြစ်သလို ဆောက်ထားတဲ့ ကျောင်းတွေပြိုကျပြီး သေဆုံးခဲ့ကြသူ ကျောင်းသားကျောင်းသူတွေရဲ့ မိဘတွေကတော့ အာဏာပိုင်တွေကို အပြစ်တင်ဆဲရှိနေပါတယ်။ အထိမ်းအမှတ်နေ့များ ငလျင်များ တရုတ်ပြည်သူ့သမ္မတနိုင်ငံ
__label__my မတ်ချိနုရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (တောင်)၊ လွိုင်လင်ခရိုင်၊ လွိုင်လင်မြို့နယ်၊ နောင်လိုင်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၀၃၂၀၁ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရနောင်လိုင်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၃၃၂၆ ဦး၊ မ ၃၅၂၆ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၆၈၅၂ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား လွိုင်လင်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my နို့ဖေါထီးရွာ()သည် ကရင်ပြည်နယ်၊ ဖာပွန်ခရိုင်၊ ဖာပွန်မြို့နယ်၊ ကတိုင်တိကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၆၉၉၃၂ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ကတိုင်တိကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် အိမ်ခြေပေါင်း ၄၆၀ အိမ် ရှိကာ၊ လူဦးရေစုစုပေါင်း ၂၈၂၀ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ဖာပွန်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my စိန်လုံရွာ()သည် ကချင်ပြည်နယ်၊ ဗန်းမော်ခရိုင်၊ မိုးမောက်မြို့နယ်၊ စိန်လုံကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၆၇၁၀၂ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ စိန်လုံကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၅၁ ဦး၊ မ ၄၂ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေစုစုပေါင်း ၉၃ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား မိုးမောက်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my တမာကုန်းရွာ ()သည် မန္တလေးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး၊ ကျောက်ဆည်ခရိုင်၊ စဉ့်ကိုင်မြို့နယ်၊ ဆည်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၉၀၇၀၈ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ဆည်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၂၄၆၆ ဦး၊ မ ၂၇၂၄ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၅၁၉၀ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား စဉ့်ကိုင်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ညံတောကန်ရွာ ()သည် ပဲခူးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး (အနောက်)၊ ပြည်ခရိုင်၊ ပေါက်ခေါင်းမြို့နယ်၊ ရွာရှည်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၁၅၁၀ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ရွာရှည်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၆၀၇ ဦး၊ မ ၆၉၁ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၂၉၈ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ပေါက်ခေါင်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my မန်ကင်းရွာ()သည် ကချင်ပြည်နယ်၊ မိုးညှင်းခရိုင်၊ မိုးညှင်းမြို့နယ်၊ ပန်းလားကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၆၆၆၂၇ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ပန်းလားကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၈၀၃ ဦး၊ မ ၁၈၇၉ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေစုစုပေါင်း ၃၆၈၂ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား မိုးညှင်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my မင်းဒေါင့်ရွာ ()သည် မကွေးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး၊ မကွေးခရိုင်၊ ချောက်မြို့နယ်၊ ဇီးပွားကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၅၂၆၅ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ဇီးပွားကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၁၂၈ ဦး၊ မ ၁၅၅၅ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၂၆၈၃ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ချောက်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဗိုင်းဗက်ရွာ()သည် ချင်းပြည်နယ်၊ ဖလမ်းခရိုင်၊ တွန်းဇံမြို့နယ်၊ တွီးမန်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၆၄၈၂၂ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ တွီးမန်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၈၄၇ ဦး၊ မ ၈၃၄ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၆၈၁ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား တွန်းဇံမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဝမ်ကောင်းရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (အရှေ့)၊ ကျိုင်းတုံခရိုင်၊ မိုင်းပျဉ်းမြို့နယ်၊ မိုင်းမန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၂၁၆၅၃ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ မိုင်းမန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၂၃၈၈ ဦး၊ မ ၂၂၇၄ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၄၆၆၂ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား မိုင်းပျဉ်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ကရဗီမြို့ သည် ထိုင်းနိုင်ငံတောင်ပိုင်း အနောက်ဘက်ကမ်းရိုးတန်း ကရဗီခရိုင်၏ အဓိကမြို့ ဖြစ်ပြီး ဖန်ငပင်လယ်အော်အတွင်း စီးဝင်သော ကရဗီမြစ်ဝတွင် တည်ရှိသည်။ ၂၀၁၀ ခုနှစ်တွင် လူဦးရေ ၅၂,၈၆၇ ဦး ရှိသည်။ ကရဗီခရိုင် နှင့် ကရဗီဒိစတြိတ် ၏ မြို့တော်ဖြစ်သည်။ ကမ္ဘာလှည့်ခရီးသွား လုပ်ငန်းသည် အရေးပါသော စီးပွားရေးလုပ်ငန်းတစ်ခု ဖြစ်သည်။ ကရဗီသည် ဘန်ကောက်မြို့ ၏ တောင်ဘက် ကုန်လမ်း ၇၈၃ ကီလိုမီတာအကွာတွင် တည်ရှိသည်။ ကိုးကား ထိုင်းနိုင်ငံရှိ မြို့များ
__label__my ပန်ယန်းရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (မြောက်)၊ ဝ ကိုယ်ပိုင်အုပ်ချုပ်ခွင့်ရတိုင်း၊ မက်မန်းခရိုင်၊ မက်မန်းမြို့နယ်၊ ပန်ယန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၁၃၂၅၉ ဖြစ်သည်။ ကိုးကား မက်မန်းမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ပဒေသာကျွန်းရွာ ()သည် ပဲခူးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး (အနောက်)၊ ပြည်ခရိုင်၊ ရွှေတောင်မြို့နယ်၊ ကျွန်းကလေးကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၂၅၇၇ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ကျွန်းကလေးကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၆၇၇ ဦး၊ မ ၇၄၈ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၄၂၅ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ရွှေတောင်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ယောင်ပလုန်းရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (မြောက်)၊ ဝ ကိုယ်ပိုင်အုပ်ချုပ်ခွင့်ရတိုင်း၊ ဟိုပန်ခရိုင်၊ မိုင်းမောမြို့နယ်၊ ကွမ်းကျိုးကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၀၇၈၃၀ ဖြစ်သည်။ ကိုးကား မိုင်းမောမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my (၁) ရက် (၂) ရက် (၃) ရက် (၄) ရက် (၅) ရက် (၆) ရက် (၇) ရက် (၈) ရက် (၉) ရက် (၁၀) ရက် (၁၁) ရက် (၁၂) ရက် (၁၃) ရက် (၁၄) ရက် (၁၅) ရက် (၁၆) ရက် (၁၇) ရက် (၁၈) ရက် (၁၉) ရက် ဗိုလ်ချုပ်အောင်ဆန်း နှင့် ဇနီးဒေါ်ခင်ကြည် တို့မှ ဒေါ်အောင်ဆန်းစုကြည်အား မွေးဖွားခဲ့သည်။ (၂၀) ရက် (၂၁) ရက် (၂၂) ရက် (၂၃) ရက် (၂၄) ရက် (၂၅) ရက် (၂၆) ရက် (၂၇) ရက် (၂၈) ရက် (၂၉) ရက် (၃၀) ရက် ကိုးကား ဇွန် ၁၉၄၅ en:1945#June
__label__my မေတင်ရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (တောင်)၊ ပအိုဝ်း ကိုယ်ပိုင်အုပ်ချုပ်ခွင့်ရဒေသ၊ ဟိုပုံးမြို့နယ်၊ နောင်ဒေးကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၀၀၉၉၉ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရနောင်ဒေးကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၉၀၄ ဦး၊ မ ၉၉၇ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၉၀၁ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ဒေသအခေါ်မှာ Hti awi-Leik tan ဖြစ်သည်။ ကိုးကား ဟိုပုံးမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my တရုတ်အလယ်ပိုင်း (; ) သည် တရုတ်နိုင်ငံ ဟဲနန်ပြည်နယ်၊ ဟူပေပြည်နယ်နှင့် ဟူနန်ပြည်နယ်တို့ ပါဝင်သော ရောထွေးနေသည့် ယဉ်ကျေးမှုများ ရှိသည့် ပထဝီဝင်ဒေသတစ်ခု ဖြစ်သည်။ ရံဖန်ရံခါတွင် ကျန်းရှီးပြည်နယ်ကို ဤဒေသ၏ တစ်စိတ်တစ်ပိုင်းအဖြစ် ရည်ညွှန်းလေ့ရှိသည်။ တရုတ်အလယ်ပိုင်းဒေသသည် ယခုအခါ တရုတ်တောင်အလယ်ပိုင်းဒေသ၏ အစိတ်အပိုင်းဖြစ်ပြီး တရုတ်ပြည်သူ့သမ္မတနိုင်ငံ အစိုးရ၏ အုပ်ချုပ်မှုအောက်တွင် ရှိသည်။ ၂၀၀၄ ခုနှစ်တွင် ချမှတ်ခဲ့သော တရုတ်ပြည်သူ့သမ္မတနိုင်ငံ နိုင်ငံတော်ကောင်စီ၏ တရုတ်အလယ်ပိုင်း တိုးတက်ရေး အစီအစဉ် (Rise of Central China Plan) အရ ဆန်းရှီးပြည်နယ်နှင့် အန်းဟွေးပြည်နယ်အပါအဝင် ပတ်ဝန်းကျင် ပြည်နယ်များကို တရုတ်အလယ်ပိုင်းဒေသ ဖွံ့ဖြိုးရေးဇုန်များအဖြစ် သတ်မှတ်ထားသည်။ အုပ်ချုပ်ရေးအပိုင်းအခြားများ မြို့ပြလူဦးရေ တစ်သန်းကျော်သော မြို့ကြီးများ ပြည်နယ်မြို့တော်များအား စာလုံးထူဖြင့် ပြထားသည်။ မှတ်စု ကိုးကား တရုတ်နိုင်ငံ၏ ဒေသများ
__label__my မယှက် (အနောက်)ရွာ ()သည် မန္တလေးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး၊ ကျောက်ဆည်ခရိုင်၊ မြစ်သားမြို့နယ်၊ မရှက်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၁၈၂၆၈ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ မရှက်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၃၉၃ ဦး၊ မ ၄၃၆ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၈၂၉ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား မြစ်သားမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ရတီကျူလန် သည် တောင်ကမ္ဘာခြမ်းကောင်းကင်၏ သေးငယ်သော ကြယ်စုတန်းတစ်ခုဖြစ်ပြီး လက်တင်ဘာသာစကားအရ အစက်ကလေးဟု အဓိပ္ပာယ်ရသည်။ ကြယ်စုတန်းအား အောက်တိုဘာနှင့် ဒီဇငဘာလများတွင် အကောင်းဆုံးမြင်ရသော်လည်း အမြင့်ပိုင်း မြောက်လတ္တီကျုတွင် မမြင်နိုင်ပေ။ ကိုးကား ပြင်ပလင့် The Deep Photographic Guide to the Constellations: Reticulum Starry Night Photography: Reticulum Constellation Star Tales – Reticulum ကြယ်စုတန်းများ
__label__my ခေါင်းအီ (တောင်)ရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (တောင်)၊ တောင်ကြီးခရိုင်၊ ဖယ်ခုံမြို့နယ်၊ ခေါင်းအီကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၀၂၇၉၀ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ခေါင်းအီကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၃၅၂၀ ဦး၊ မ ၃၅၂၂ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၇၀၄၂ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ဖယ်ခုံမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my မြတ်ဗုဒ္ဓနှင့် မြတ်ဗုဒ္ဓသာဝက ရဟန်းတော်တို့ထံသို့ မချဉ်းကပ်သင့်ချိန်၊ မြတ် ဗုဒ္ဓ၏ ပရိသတ်နှင့် အညတိတ္ထိယပရိသတ်တို့၏ ခြားနားချက်၊ အနာထပိဏ်သူဌေး၏ အညတိတ္ထယပရိဗိုဇ်များကို ရှိမခိုးပုံ၊ အယူဝါဒနှင့် ဆက်စပ်၍ ပရိဗိုဇ်များ၏ မေးမြန်း ချက်ကို အနာထပိဏ်သူဌေး ဖြေဆိုပုံ၊ အနာထပိဏ်သူဌေး၏ မေးမြန်းချက်အရ ပရိဗိုဇ်များ ဖြေကြားသော အညတိတ္ထိယဝါဒ (၁၀)မျိုး၊ ယင်းဆယ်မျိုးနှင့် ဆက်စပ်၍ အနာထပိဏ်သူဌေး၏ ဖြေရှင်းပြရာ ပရိဗိုဇ်များ ပြန်လည်မချေပနိုင်တော့ပဲ လက်လျော့ ကြရပုံ၊ ဘုရားရှင်အား အနာထပိဏ်သူဌေးက လျှောက်ထားရာ ဘုရားရှင်က အနာထပိဏ်သူဌေး၏ ဖြေကြားချက်ကို လက်ခံအတည်ပြုမိန့်ကြားတော်မူပုံ၊ ရဟန်းတို့အား အနာထပိဏ်သူဌေး၏ ပရိဗိုဇ်တို့၏အယူဝါဒကို မှန်ကန်သောအကြောင်းဖြင့် နှိမ်နင်းပုံကို ဘုရားရှင် ဟောတော်မူသည့်သုတ်။ ကိုးကား အင်္ဂုတ္တရနိကာယ်
__label__my ဒွန်ရှမ်း( ခေါက်ရှမ်း သို့မဟုတ် ရှမ်းဖြူ) ဟုလည်းလူသိများသော ဗီယက်နမ် မြောက်ပိုင်း၊ လာအို နှင့် တရုတ်တို့တွင်နေထိုင်ကြပြီး တိုင်ဘာသာစကားများ ကို ပြောဆိုကြသည် ။ အဓိကပျံ့နှံ့နေထိုင်သည့်နေရာ တရုတ်နိုင်ငံတွင် ရှမ်းဖြူ(ခေါက်ရှမ်းလူမျိုး) သည် လူဦးရေ ၄၀,၀၀၀ခန့်ရှိပြီး ယူနန်ပြည်နယ်၏အောက်ပါမြို့နယ်များတွင်တည်ရှိသည် (Gao 1999) ။ ကျင်းဖင်ခရိုင် - မိုးလားနှင့် ကျဲမီမြို့နယ် (ကျဲမီမြစ်နှင့် ထန်ထျောက် မြစ်လျှောက်)တွင် နေထိုင်ကြသည်။ မားလီဖိုးခရိုင် : နန်ဝမ့်ဟေမြို့နယ် မာကွမ်ခရိုင် : တူးလုံမြို့ ကျန်းချန်ခရိုင် : ရွှီးရွှေမြို့နယ် (ထူးခါမြစ်ကမ်းတစ်လျှောက် ) ကိုးကား ဗီယက်နမ်နိုင်ငံ၏ ဘာသာစကားများ
__label__my နားစင့်ရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (တောင်)၊ လွိုင်လင်ခရိုင်၊ လွိုင်လင်မြို့နယ်၊ ဟဲနန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၀၃၁၃၂ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ဟဲနန်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၃၀၀၅ ဦး၊ မ ၃၁၈၈ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၆၁၉၃ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား လွိုင်လင်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my မြန်မာနိုင်ငံသည် ၁၉၄၈ ​နွေရာသီအိုလံပစ်ပြိုင်ပွဲတွင် ပထမဦးဆုံး ယှဉ်ပြိုင်ခဲ့သည်။ ၁၉၇၆ ​နွေရာသီအားကစားပွဲမှလွဲ၍ ပွဲတိုင်းတွင် ယှဉ်ပြိုင်ခဲ့သည်။​ ဆောင်းရာသီအားကစားပွဲကိုမူ တစ်ကြိမ်မျှ မယှဉ်ပြိုင်ခဲ့​ပေ။ ​နောက်ဆုံး ၂၀၁၆ ပြိုင်ပွဲအထိ မည်သည့်ဆုတံဆိပ်မျှ ဆွတ်ခူးခဲ့ခြင်းမရှိ​ပေ။ ယှဉ်ပြိုင်ခဲ့သူများ ဆုတံဆိပ်ဇယား ဆက်စပ်ကြည့်ရှုရန် မြန်မာအသင်း၏ ပါရာလမ်းပစ်ပြိုင်ပွဲရလဒ် ကိုးကား မြန်မာနိုင်ငံအသင်း၏ နွေရာသီအိုလံပစ်ပြိုင်ပွဲ ဝင်ရောက်ယှဉ်ပြိုင်မှုများ မြန်မာနိုင်ငံ၏ နိုင်ငံတကာအားကစားပြိုင်ပွဲများတွင် ဝင်ရောက်ယှဉ်ပြိုင်မှုများ
__label__my အိုင်ဗဲရွာ()သည် ချင်းပြည်နယ်၊ ဟားခါးခရိုင်၊ ဟားခါးမြို့နယ်၊ ဒါအိုချိမ်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၆၄၅၂၃ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ဒါအိုချိမ်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၃၃၈ ဦး၊ မ ၃၇၄ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၇၁၂ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ဟားခါးမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my အောက်ပြင်စိုရွာ()သည် ချင်းပြည်နယ်၊ မတူပီခရိုင်၊ ပလက်ဝမြို့နယ်၊ ပြင်ငူကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၆၅၃၄၁ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ပြင်ငူကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၄၁၅ ဦး၊ မ ၄၂၄ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၈၃၉ ဦး နေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ပလက်ဝမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ဖန်းခါးပင်ရွာ ()သည် မကွေးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး၊ မကွေးခရိုင်၊ မြို့သစ်မြို့နယ်၊ စစ်တလင်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၈၅၆၉၀ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ စစ်တလင်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၁၇၀၅ ဦး၊ မ ၁၉၃၅ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၃၆၄၀ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား မြို့သစ်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my မန်ခူးရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (မြောက်)၊ ဝ ကိုယ်ပိုင်အုပ်ချုပ်ခွင့်ရတိုင်း၊ ဟိုပန်ခရိုင်၊ ဟိုပန်မြို့နယ်၊ လွယ်ခမ်းကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၁၁၃၈၉ ဖြစ်သည်။ ကိုးကား ဟိုပန်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my မန်ကောင်ရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (မြောက်)၊ ဝ ကိုယ်ပိုင်အုပ်ချုပ်ခွင့်ရတိုင်း၊ မက်မန်းခရိုင်၊ ပန်ဆန်း (ပန်ခမ်း)မြို့နယ်၊ နမ့်ကျက်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၀၇၁၇၇ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ နမ့်ကျက်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၇၆၀ ဦး၊ မ ၇၃၂ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၄၉၂ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား ပန်ဆန်း (ပန်ခမ်း)မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ကော်လာရွာ ()သည် ရှမ်းပြည်နယ် (အရှေ့)၊ မိုင်းဆတ်ခရိုင်၊ မိုင်းဆတ်မြို့နယ်၊ ကျတီကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၂၂၁၂၀၅ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ကျတီကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၃၈၀၂ ဦး၊ မ ၃၃၁၁ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၇၁၁၃ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား မိုင်းဆတ်မြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ပျော်ကုန်းရွာ ()သည် မန္တလေးတိုင်းဒေသကြီး၊ မိတ္ထီလာခရိုင်၊ မိတ္ထီလာမြို့နယ်၊ ညောင်မြင့်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စု၌ တည်ရှိသည်။ ရွာနေရာကုတ်မှာ ၁၉၃၉၇၆ ဖြစ်သည်။ ၂၀၁၄ သန်းခေါင်စာရင်းအရ ညောင်မြင့်ကျေးရွာအုပ်စုတွင် ကျား ၈၄၄ ဦး၊ မ ၁၀၂၂ ဦး၊ လူဦးရေ စုစုပေါင်း ၁၈၆၆ ဦးနေထိုင်သည်။ ကိုးကား မိတ္ထီလာမြို့နယ်ရှိ ရွာများ
__label__my ရုတ်တရက် အိပ်ပျော်ခြင်းသည် နှစ်ရှည်လများ အာရုံကြောဆိုင်ရာချို့ယွင်းမှု တစ်ခုဖြစ်ပြီး အိပ်ရေးနိုးခြင်းစက်ဝန်း များကို ထိန်းညှိပေးနိုင်စွမ်း ကျဆင်းခြင်းပါရှိသည်။ ရောဂါလက္ခဏာများတွင် နေ့ဘက်တွင် အလွန်အကျွံအိပ်ငိုက် သည့်အချိန်များနှင့် ခေတ္တမအိပ်စက်ခြင်းအပိုင်းများ ပါဝင်တတ်သည်။ ထိခိုက်ခံရသူများ၏ 70% ခန့်သည် cataplexy ဟုခေါ်သော ကြွက်သားခွန်အားရုတ်တရက် ဆုံးရှုံးသွားသည့် အပိုင်းများကိုလည်း တွေ့ကြုံခံစားရပါသည်။ ဤအတွေ့အကြုံများကို ပြင်းထန်သော စိတ်ခံစားမှုများဖြင့် သယ်ဆောင်လာနိုင်သည်။ များသောအားဖြင့် နည်းပါးသည်မှာ၊ အိပ်ပျော်နေစဉ် သို့မဟုတ် နိုးလာချိန်တွင်ကယောင်ချောက်ချား ခြင်း သို့မဟုတ် မလှုပ်ရှားနိုင်မှု ဘီလူးစီးခြင်း ဖြစ်နိုင်သည်။ ‌ဤ ရောဂါ ရှိ‌သော လူများသည် တစ်နေ့ကို နာရီပေါင်းများစွာ အိပ်လေ့ရှိပေမယ့် အိပ်စက်ခြင်းအရည်အသွေးကတော့ လျော့နည်းသွားလေ့ရှိသည်။ ကိုးကား အိပ်စက်ခြင်း
__label__my ဘီယာ ရှိလား။
__label__my ထောမ်ကို ဆက်ပြီး မလိမ်ညာနိုင်တော့ဘူး။
__label__my မင်းဥယျဉ်ထဲက နှင်းဆီပန်းတွေ ဘယ်တော့ပွင့်မှာလဲ
__label__my မရူးစမ်းနဲ့။
__label__my အဲဒါက မင်းထင်သလောက်လည်း ကြောက်စရာမကောင်းပါဘူး
__label__my ကျွန်တော် က လူတစ်‌ယောက်ပါ။
__label__my တွမ် ငှက်ပျောသီးကြိုက်တယ်။
__label__my နုတ်ဆက်ပါတယ်လို့ ပြောချင်တယ်။
__label__my ငါက နင့် အစေခံ မဟုတ်ဘူး။
__label__my ကျမက အပေါ်ထပ်မှာ။
__label__my ဘယ်လမ်းကသွားတာအကောင်းဆုံးလဲ
__label__my ငါက နင့် ကျွန် မဟုတ်ဘူး။
__label__my ကျေးဇူးပြုပြီး ဖြည်းဖြည်း ပြောပေးပါ။
__label__my သူတို့ လိုက်နာကြတယ်။
__label__my မဟုတ်ဘူး။
__label__my ကျမ နင့်ကို နက်ဖြန် မတွေ့နိုင်ဘူး။
__label__my ကျွန်မက ကျောင်းသူ တစ်‌ယောက် ပါ။
__label__my ကျွန်တော် ပင်လယ်တွင် ရေကူး နေသည်။
__label__my ကျွန်တော် က ဆရာဝန် တစ်‌‌ယောက် မဟုတ်ပါ။
__label__my တယ်ရိုဆောဆိုတာ တကယ့်ဒိုင်နိုဆောမှမဟုတ်တာ။
__label__my မင်းဥယျာဉ်ထဲက နှင်းဆီပန်းတွေ ဘယ်တော့ပွင့်မှာလဲ
__label__my နင်တို့က ထောမ်ရဲ့ ကျောင်းသားတွေ၊ ဟုတ်တယ်နော။
__label__my လာပါ။
__label__my သူတို့ ရေကူးခဲ့ကြတယ်။
__label__my သူ၏ ဇနီး ဒေါ်မြရီမှာ သူ့အရင် ကွယ်လွန် ခဲ့သည်။
__label__my သင် ဘာကို ဆိုလိုတာလဲ။
__label__my ကျနော် အဲ့ဒီ မိန်းကလေးကို တွေ့တယ်။
__label__my ကျမဆီက လိုချင်တယ်ဆိုတာက ဘာလဲ?
__label__my ငါ နားမလည် ဘူး။
__label__my ယာဉ်စီးသည်တွေတယ​ောက်မှ ဒဏ်ရာမရဘူးဆိုတာမှ မဟုတ်တာ။
__label__my ကျွန်တော်က ကျောင်သား တစ်‌ယောက် ပါ။
__label__my ငါလည်း အဲ့လိုပဲ ခံစားမိတယ်။
__label__my လုပ်လို့ရတယ်ဆိုတိုင်း လုပ်ဖို့မလိုပါဘူး
__label__my ကျေးဇူးပြုပြီး ပြန်ပြောပါ။
__label__my ထောမ်ကို အဲ့ဒါ လုပ်ဖို့ ပြောလိုက်တယ်။
__label__my တွမ်ဟာ အတော်စိုးရိမ်နေပုံပဲ
__label__my မသိလျှင်မေး၊ မစင်လျှင်ဆေး။
__label__my ငါက အပေါ်ထပ်မှာ။
__label__my ထောမ်က သိပ်ပြီး မပျော်ရွှင် သလိုပဲ။
__label__my တဘက်က ရေချိုးခန်းထဲမှာ။
__label__my အဲ့ဒါက တကယ့် အစီအစဥ် မဟုတ်ခဲ့ဘူး။
__label__my ငါ နင့်ကို နက်ဖြန်မတွေ့ နိုင်ဘူး။
__label__my အခန်းခ ထဲမှာ ထည့်လိုက်ပါ။
__label__my ကျမလည်း အဲ့လိုပဲ ခံစားမိတယ်။
__label__my ထောမ်က အရမ်းဆိုးတယ် သူပဲ။
__label__my ကျနော် ကျနော့် ကားပေါ်မှာ အနားယူနေတယ်။
__label__my အိမ်သာ ဘယ်မှာလဲ။
__label__my နင်နဲ့ ဆုံရတာ ဝမ်းသာ ပါတယ်/
__label__my ထောမ်က စကားအရမ်းပြောတယ်။
__label__my မျောက်တွေက ငှက်ပျောသီးကြိုက်ကြတယ်။
__label__my ကျွန်တော်တို့ အိမ် ဘာဖြစ်လို့ မရှိဘူးလဲ။
__label__my ကျနော်က အပေါ်ထပ်မှာ။
__label__my သူက ကောင်မလေး တစ်ယောက်ပါ။
__label__my ယခု ဘယ်နှနာရီ ရှိပြီလဲ?
__label__my ကျနော့်ဆီက လိုချင်တယ်ဆိုတာက ဘာလဲ?
__label__my ကျေးဇူးပြပြီး ငါ့ကို ဆရာဝန် ခေါ်ပေးပါ။
__label__my ခဏစောင့်ပါ။
__label__my မေရီလည်း ငှက်ပျောသီးကြိုက်တယ်။
__label__my ဒါကငါလိုချင်တာမှမဟုတ်တာ။
__label__my နင်တို့ နှစ်ယောက်လုံး တော်တော် အေးပါလား။
__label__my ဘယ်နှနာရီရှိပြီလဲ။
__label__my ထောမ် ရေထဲ ကျမိတယ်။
__label__my အဲဒါက မင်းထင်သလောက် ကြောက်စရာမကောင်းပါဘူး။
__label__my ဂုဏ်ယူပါတယ်။
__label__my အဖြစ်က ဒီလိုမဟုတ်ဖို့ မျှော်လင့်တယ်။
__label__my ပြန်ပြော။
__label__my ထောမ်က အရမ်းဆိုးတဲ့ ကောင်။
__label__my ကျနော်လည်း အဲ့လိုပဲ ခံစားမိတယ်။
__label__my မင်္ဂလာပါ၊ နေကောင်းလား။
__label__my သူတို့ ရေကူးနေခဲ့ကြတယ်။
__label__my ကျွန်မက မိန်းမ တစ်ယောက် ပါ။
__label__my မနေ့ကလာတဲ့ ယောကျ်ားလေးက ကျနော့် ညီလေးပါ။
__label__my မိုးကတစ်နေကုန်ရွာတာပဲ။
__label__my နင်ဆီမှာ ရှိတယ်ဆိုတာ ကျနော် သိတယ်။
__label__my အင်္ဂလိပ် စကား ပြောတတ်သလား။
__label__my စစ်ပွဲဆိုတာ ရှောင်လွှဲမရတာမှ မဟုတ်တာ။
__label__my ထောပတ်ပြော့တယ်။
__label__my အဲ့ဒါက မရှိမဖြစ် လိုအပ်တယ်။
__label__my ကျေးဇူးပဲ။
__label__my ကျွန်တောတို့ရဲ့လှေကား ပျက်ဆီးပြီးပြီ။
__label__my ကျနော် ကော်ဖီ သောက်ဖို့ အထဲကို ဝင်လာတာပါ။
__label__my လူ့အဖွဲ့အစည်းစည်းမျဉ်းစည်းကမ်းတွေက သဘာဝတရားကြီးကနေ လာတာမှမဟုတ်တာ။ အဲဒါက အများသဘောတူညီချက်ပေါ် အခြေခံပြီး ဆောက်တည်ထားတာ။
__label__my ခါလီဖာ မိုးမျှော်တိုက် အဆောက်အဦသည် ယခုအချိန်တွင် ကမ္ဘာ့အမြင့်ဆုံးမိုးမျှော်တိုက်ဖြစ်သည်။
__label__my ငါ့ကိုမုန်းနေကြတဲ့ သူတွေကိုတစ်ခုပဲ ပြောစရာရှိတယ်။ အဲဒါမင်းတို့ကိစ္စပဲ
__label__my မအော်နဲ့လေ၊ အိမ်နီးနားချင်း တွေ နင်ကြား ကုန်လိမ့်မယ်။
__label__my သင် အလုပ်တခုကို မှန်ကန်စွာ ပြီးမြောက်စေချင်လျှင်၊ တခါတရံ မိမိကိုယ်တိုင် လုပ်ဆောင်ရမည်ဖြစ်သည်။
__label__my ဝီကီပီးဒီးယား သည် သုံးစွဲသူများက ပူးပေါင်း၍ ရေးသား တည်းဖြတ် ထားသော စွယ်စုံကျမ်း ဖြစ်ပါသည်။
__label__my ရှိသမျှမြင်းတွေက တိရိစ္ဆာန်၊ ပေမဲ့ ရှိသမျှ တိရိစ္ဆာန်တွေကတော့ မြင်းမှမဟုတ်တာ။
__label__my ထောမ်ဟာ ချိန်းချက်မှုကို နောက်ကျတာ ကြုံတောင့်ကြုံခဲပါပဲ။
__label__my ငါတို့ မွေးလာတာ သမီးအဖြစ်နဲ့မှ မဟုတ်တာ၊ ငါတို့က သူတို့ရဲ့ တစိတ်တပိုင်းပါ။
__label__my အာရှတိုက်သည် ကမ္ဘာပေါ်ရှိ တိုက်ကြီးများတွင် အကြီးဆုံး နှင့် လူဦးရေ အထူထပ်ဆုံး ဖြစ်သည်။
__label__my ငါ့ရဲ့ ညီအစ်မနှစ်ယောက်လုံး လက်ထပ်ပြီးသွားတာတော့ မဟုတ်ပါ။
__label__my နက်ဖြန် ရာသီဥတု အခြေအနေ ဘယ်လို ရှိမလဲ ဆိုတာ ပြောရခက်တယ်။
__label__my နှင်းလူတွေက အချစ်တော်မှ မဟုတ်တာ။ ဦးဆုံး၊ သူတို့ကို Bigfoot လို့ ခေါ်တာမှ မကြိုက်တာ။
__label__my ကျနော့် နာရီ ကြည့်တော့မှပဲ ကျနော် တနာရီ စော နေမှန်း သတိထားမိတော့တယ်။
__label__my ငါက ကြည့်လိုက်ရင် ခွန်အားသန်မာတဲ့သူလိုပဲ၊ ဒါပေမဲ့ တကယ့်တကယ်က ဒီလိုမှမဟုတ်တာ။
__label__my ပညာသင်ကြားရေးကို လူသားတို့၏စရိုက်လက္ခဏာအပြည့်အဝတိုးတက်မှု အပြင်၊ လူ့အခွင့်အရေးနှင့် အခြေခံလွတ်လပ်ခွင့် ရိုသေ လေးစားမှု တို့ကို ရှင်သန်ဖွံ့ဖြိုးလာစေရန် ရည်ရွယ်၍ သင်ကြား စေရမည်။ ပညာသင်ကြားရေးသည် နိုင်ငံ အားလုံး တို့တွင် လည်းကောင်း၊ လူမျိုးစုများ တွင်လည်းကောင်း၊ ဘာသာရေးအသင်းအဖွဲ့များတွင် လည်းကောင်း၊ အချင်းချင်းနားလည်မှု၊ သည်းခံ မှုနှင့် ခင်မင်ရင်းနှီးမှုတို့ကို အားပေးရမည်။ ထို့ပြင် ငြိမ်းချမ်းရေး တည်တံ့အောင် ဆောင်ရွက်ရန် အလို့ငှာ၊ ကုလသမဂ္ဂ၏ ဆောင်ရွက်မှုများကိုလည်း ဖြစ်မြောက် အောင် အားပေးရမည်။
__label__my ဤကြေညာစာတမ်းပါ အခွင့်အရေးနှင့်တကွ လွတ်လပ်ခွင့်များ ပျက်စီးရာပျက်စီးကြောင်းတို့ကိုရည်ရွယ်၍၊ နိုင်ငံ တစ်နိုင်ငံ အတွက် ဖြစ်စေ၊ လူတစ်စု အတွက်ဖြစ်စေ၊ လူတစ်ဦးတစ်ယောက် အတွက် ဖြစ်စေ ပါဝင် ဆောင်ရွက်ရန် အခွင့်ရှိသည်ဟု သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ ကိုယ်တိုင်ဆောင်ရွက်ရန် အခွင့်ရှိသည်ဟုသော်လည်းကောင်း အဓိပ္ပာယ် ပိုင်းခြားကောက်ယူခြင်း မရှိစေရ။
__label__my လူအားလုံးတို့သည် ဥပဒေအရာ၌ တူညီကြသည့်အပြင်၊ ဥပဒေ၏ အကာအကွယ်ကို ခြားနားခြင်း မခံရစေဘဲ တူညီစွာ ခံစားပိုင်ခွင့်ရှိသည်။ ဤကြေညာ စာတမ်းပါ သဘောတရားများကို ဖီဆန်၍ ခွဲခြားခြင်းမှ လည်းကောင်း၊ ထိုသို့ခွဲခြားခြင်းကို လှုံဆော်ခြင်းမှ လည်းကောင်း၊ ကင်းလွတ် စေရန် အကာအကွယ်ကို တူညီစွာ ခံစားပိုင်ခွင့် ရှိသည်။
__label__my သားသည် မိခင်များနှင့် ကလေးများသည် အထူးစောင့်ရှောက်ခြင်းနှင့် အကူအညီပေးခြင်းကို ရခွင့် ရှိသည်။ ဥပဒေအရ ထိမ်းမြားခြင်းဖြင့်ဖြစ်စေ အခြား နည်းဖြင့် ဖြစ်စေ မွေးဖွားသော ကလေးအားလုံးသည် တူညီသော လူမှု ကာကွယ် စောင့်ရှောက်ရေးကို ရယူ ခံစားကြရမည်။
__label__my လူတိုင်းတွင် မိမိနိုင်ငံ၏ အုပ်ချုပ်ရေး၌ ကိုယ်တိုင်ဖြစ်စေ၊ လွတ်လပ်စွာ ရွေးချယ်လိုက်သည့် ကိုယ်စားလှယ်များမှ တစ်ဆင့်ဖြစ်စေ ပါဝင် ဆောင်ရွက်နိုင်ခွင့် ရှိသည်။
__label__my လူတိုင်းတွင် သင့်မြတ်လျော်ကန်စွာ ကန့်သတ်ထားသည့် အလုပ်လုပ်ချိန် အပြင်၊ လစာနှင့်တကွ အခါကာလအားလျော်စွာ သတ်မှတ် ထားသည့် အလုပ် အားလပ်ရက်များပါဝင်သည့် အနားယူခွင့်နှင့် အားလပ်ခွင့် ခံစားပိုင်ခွင့် ရှိသည်။
__label__my လူတိုင်းတွင် သိပ္ပံမှ ဖြစ်စေ၊ စာပေမှဖြစ်စေ၊ သုခုမပညာမှ ဖြစ်စေ၊ မိမိကိုယ်ပိုင်ဉာဏ်ဖြင့် ကြံစည်ဖန်တီးမှုမှ ဖြစ်ထွန်းလာသည့် ဂုဏ်နှင့် ငွေကြေး အကျိုးအမြတ်များကို ခံစားရယူနိုင်ရန် အခွင့်အရေးအတွက် ကာကွယ်မှုကို ရရှိရန် အခွင့်အရေး ရှိသည်။
__label__my ဖွဲ့စည်းပုံ အခြေခံဥပဒေက သော်လည်းကောင်း အခြား ဥပဒေက သော်လည်းကောင်း လူတိုင်းအတွက် ပေးထားသည့် အခြေခံ အခွင့်အရေး များသည် ချိုးဖောက် ဖျက်ဆီးခြင်းခံခဲ့ရလျှင် ထိုသို့ ချိုးဖောက်ဖျက်ဆီးသော ပြုလုပ်မှုကြောင့် ဖြစ်ပေါ်လာသော နစ်နာချက် အတွက် ထိုသူသည် နိုင်ငံဆိုင်ရာ အာဏာပိုင်တရားရုံးတွင် ထိရောက်စွာ သက်သာ ခွင့်ရနိုင်စေရမည်။
__label__my အခွင့်အရေးများနှင့် တာဝန် ဝတ္တရားများကို အဆုံးအဖြတ်ခံရာတွင် လည်းကောင်း၊ ပြစ်မှုကြောင့် တရားစွဲဆို စီရင်ဆုံးဖြတ်ခံရာတွင် လည်းကောင်း၊ လူတိုင်းသည် လွတ်လပ်၍ ဘက်မလိုက်သော တရားရုံးတော်၏ လူအများ ရှေ့မှောက်တွင် မျှတစွာ ကြားနာစစ်ဆေးခြင်းကို တူညီစွာ ခံစားပိုင်ခွင့်ရှိသည်။
__label__my လူတိုင်းသည် ဤကြေညာ စာတမ်းတွင် ဖော်ပြထားသည့် အခွင့်အရေးများ နှင့် လွတ်လပ်ခွင့်များကို အပြည့်အစုံ ရယူနိုင်သော လူမှုဆက်ဆံရေး အခြေအနေနှင့် အပြည်ပြည်ဆိုင်ရာ ဆက်ဆံရေး အခြေအနေတို့၏ အကျိုးကျေးဇူးကို ခံစားနိုင်ခွင့် ရှိသည်။
__label__my လူတိုင်းတွင် မိမိနေထိုင်ရာ တိုင်းပြည်မှ လည်းကောင်း၊ အခြားတိုင်းပြည်မှလည်းကောင်း ထွက်ခွာ သွားပိုင်ခွင့်ရှိသည့်အပြင်၊ မိမိ၏ တိုင်းပြည်သို့ ပြန်လာ ပိုင်ခွင့်လည်းရှိသည်။
__label__my အဆိုပါ အခွင့်အရေးများနှင့် လွတ်လပ် ခွင့်များကို မည်သည့် အမှုကိစ္စတွင်မျှ ကုလသမဂ္ဂ၏ ရည်ရွယ်ချက်များနှင့် လည်းကောင်း၊ အခြေခံမူများနှင့် လည်းကောင်း ဆန့်ကျင်၍ မသုံးစွဲရ။
__label__my လူခပ်သိမ်း၏ မျိုးရိုးဂုဏ်သိက္ခာနှင့်တကွ လူတိုင်းအညီအမျှခံစားခွင့်ရှိသည့် အခွင့်အရေးများကို အသိအမှတ်ပြုခြင်းသည် လူခပ်သိမ်း၏လွတ်လပ်မှု၊ တရားမျှတမှု၊ ငြိမ်းချမ်းမှုတို့၏ အခြေခံအုတ်မြစ်ဖြစ်သောကြောင့်လည်းကောင်း၊
__label__my လူတိုင်းတွင် သက်ဆိုင်ရာ ယဉ်ကျေးမှု လောက၌ လွတ်လပ်စွာ ပါဝင်ဆောင် ရွက်နိုင်ခွင့် သုခုမပညာရပ် များကို လွတ်လပ်စွာလိုက်စား မွေ့လျော်နိုင်ခွင့်၊ သိပ္ပံ ပညာထွန်းကားရေး လုပ်ငန်းများတွင် လွတ်လပ်စွာ ဝင်ရောက် လုပ်ကိုင် နိုင်ခွင့်နှင့် ထိုပညာ၏ အကျိုး အာနိသင်များကို လွတ်လပ်စွာ ခံစားသုံးစွဲနိုင်ခွင့် ရှိသည်။
__label__my လူတိုင်းတွင် လွတ်လပ်စွာ ထင်မြင် ယူဆနိုင်ခွင့်နှင့် လွတ်လပ်စွာ ဖွင့်ဟ ဖော်ပြနိုင်ခွင့်ရှိသည်။ အဆိုပါ အခွင့်အရေးများ၌ အနှောင့် အယှက်မရှိဘဲ လွတ်လပ်စွာ ထင်မြင်ယူဆနိုင်ခွင့် ပါဝင် သည့်အပြင်၊ နိုင်ငံနယ်နိမိတ်များကို ထောက်ထားရန် မလိုဘဲ သတင်းအကြောင်းအရာနှင့် သဘောတရားများကို တနည်းနည်းဖြင့် လွတ်လပ်စွာ ရှာယူဆည်းပူးနိုင်ခွင့်၊ လက်ခံနိုင်ခွင့်နှင့် ဝေငှ ဖြန့်ချီခွင့်တို့လည်း ပါဝင်သည်။
__label__my လူတိုင်းတွင် လွတ်လပ်စွာ တွေးခေါ် ကြံဆနိုင်ခွင့်၊ လွတ်လပ်စွာ ခံယူရပ်တည်နိုင်ခွင့် နှင့် လွတ်လပ်စွာ သက်ဝင် ကိုးကွယ်နိုင်ခွင့်ရှိသည်။ အဆိုပါ အခွင့်အရေးများ၌ မိမိကိုးကွယ်သည့် ဘာသာကို သို့တည်းမဟုတ် သက်ဝင်ယုံကြည်ချက်ကို လွတ်လပ်စွာ ပြောင်းလဲနိုင်ခွင့် ပါဝင်သည့် အပြင် မိမိတစ်ယောက် ချင်းဖြစ်စေ၊ အခြားသူများနှင့် စုပေါင်း၍ဖြစ်စေ၊ ပြည်သူအများ ရှေ့မှောက်တွင် သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ ရှေ့မှောက်တွင် မဟုတ်ဘဲ သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ မိမိ ကိုးကွယ်သော ဘာသာကို သို့တည်းမဟုတ် သက်ဝင် ယုံကြည်ချက်ကို လွတ်လပ်စွာ သင်ပြနိုင်ခွင့်၊ ကျင့်သုံးနိုင်ခွင့်၊ ဝတ်ပြုကိုးကွယ်နိုင်ခွင့်နှင့် ဆောက်တည် နိုင်ခွင့်တို့လည်း ပါဝင်သည်။
__label__my အလုပ်လုပ်ကိုင်သည့် လူတိုင်းတွင်၊ မိမိနှင့် မိမိ၏ မိသားစုအတွက် လူ့ဂုဏ်သိက္ခာ နှင့် ညီအောင် နေထိုင် စားသောက်နိုင်ရန်၊ စိတ်ချလောက်သည့်ပြင်၊ တရား မျှတ၍ လုပ်ပျော်သည့် လစာကြေးငွေ ရပိုင်ခွင့်ရှိသည်။ လိုအပ်ခဲ့လျှင်အခြား နည်းလမ်းများမှ လူမှုရေး အထောက်အပံ့ကိုလည်း ထပ်မံ၍ ရနိုင်ခွင့် ရှိသည်။
__label__my လူ့အခွင့်ရေးများကို အရေးမထား မထီလေးစားပြုခြင်းသည် လူခပ်သိမ်း၏ အကျင့်သိက္ခာကို ချိုးဖောက် ဖျက်ဆီးတတ်သည့် ရက်စက်ကြမ်းကြုတ်သော အပြုအမှုများကို ဖြစ်ပေါ်စေခဲ့သောကြောင့်လည်းကောင်း၊ လွတ်လပ်စွာ ဖွင့်ဟပြောဆိုနိုင်မှု လွတ်လပ်စွာ သက်ဝင် ယုံကြည်နိုင်မှု၊ ကြောက်ရွံ့ခြင်း၊ ချို့ငဲ့ခြင်းတို့မှ ကင်းလွတ်စွာ အသက်မွေးနိုင်မှုတို့ကို ခံစားရယူနိုင်စေမည့် လောကတစ်ခု ပေါ်ပေါက်လာရန်အရေးကို လူခပ်သိမ်းတို့က မိမိတို့၏ အထက်သန်ဆုံးသော လိုလားချက်ဆန္ဒကြီးအဖြစ်ဖြင့် ကြွေးကြော်ကြေညာပြီး ဖြစ်သောကြောင့် လည်းကောင်း၊
__label__my မည်သူမျှ မိမိသဘောအတိုင်း အေးချမ်းလွတ်လပ်စွာ နေထိုင်ခြင်းကို သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ မိမိ၏ မိသားစုကို သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ မိမိ၏ နေအိမ် အသိုက်အဝန်းကို သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ စာပေးစာယူကို သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ ဥပဒေအရ မဟုတ်သော ဝင်ရောက် စွက်ဖက်ခြင်း မခံစေရ။ ထို့ပြင် မိမိ၏ဂုဏ်သိက္ခာ ကိုလည်း အထက်ပါအတိုင်း ပုတ်ခတ်ခြင်း မခံစေရ။ လူတိုင်းတွင် ထိုသို့ ဝင်ရောက်စွက်ဖက်ခြင်းမှ သော်လည်းကောင်း ပုတ်ခတ်ခြင်းမှ သော်လည်းကောင်း ဥပဒေအရ ကာကွယ် ပိုင်ခွင့်ရှိသည်။
__label__my လူတိုင်းတွင် အလုပ်လုပ် ရန်လည်းကောင်း၊ မိမိနှစ်သက်ရာ အသက်မွေးမှု အလုပ် အကိုင်ကို လွတ်လပ်စွာရွေးချယ်ရန် လည်းကောင်း၊ တရား မျှတ၍ လုပ်ပျော်သော အလုပ်ခွင်၏ အခြေအနေကို ရရှိရန် လည်းကောင်း၊ အလုပ်လက်မဲ့ ဖြစ်ရခြင်းမှ အကာအကွယ် ရရှိရန် လည်းကောင်း အခွင့်အရေးရှိသည်။
__label__my လူတိုင်းသည် လူ့အခွင့် အရေး ကြေညာစာတမ်းတွင် ဖော်ပြထားသည့် အခွင့်အရေး အားလုံး၊ လွတ်လပ်ခွင့် အားလုံးတို့ကို ပိုင်ဆိုင် ခံစားခွင့်ရှိသည်။ လူမျိုးနွယ်အားဖြင့် ဖြစ်စေ၊ အသားအရောင်အားဖြင့် ဖြစ်စေ၊ ကျား၊ မ၊ သဘာဝအားဖြင့် ဖြစ်စေ၊ ဘာသာစကားအားဖြင့် ဖြစ်စေ၊ ကိုးကွယ်သည့် ဘာသာအားဖြင့် ဖြစ်စေ၊ နိုင်ငံရေးယူဆချက်၊ သို့တည်းမဟုတ် အခြားယူဆချက်အားဖြင့် ဖြစ်စေ၊ နိုင်ငံနှင့် ဆိုင်သော၊ သို့တည်းမဟုတ် လူမှုအဆင့်အတန်းနှင့် ဆိုင်သော ဇစ်မြစ် အားဖြင့်ဖြစ်စေ၊ ပစ္စည်း ဥစ္စာ ဂုဏ်အားဖြင့် ဖြစ်စေ၊ မျိုးရိုးဇာတိအားဖြင့် ဖြစ်စေ၊ အခြား အဆင့်အတန်း အားဖြင့် ဖြစ်စေ ခွဲခြားခြင်းမရှိစေရ။
__label__my လူတိုင်းသည် ပညာသင် ယူနိုင်ခွင့်ရှိသည်၊ အနည်းဆုံးမူလတန်းနှင့် အခြေခံ အဆင့် အတန်းများတွင် ပညာ သင်ကြားရေးသည် အခမဲ့ဖြစ်ရမည်။ မူလတန်းပညာသည် မသင်မနေရ ပညာ ဖြစ်ရမည်။ စက်မှုလက်မှုပညာနှင့် အသက်မွေးမှု ပညာများကို ယေဘူယျအားဖြင့် သင်ကြားရယူနိုင်စေရမည်။ ထို့ပြင် အထက်တန်းပညာအတွက် အရည်အချင်းကို အခြေခံပြု၍ တူညီသော အခွင့်အရေး ရရှိစေရမည်။
__label__my လူတိုင်းတွင် လူ့အဖွဲ့အစည်း၏ အဖွဲ့ဝင်တစ်ဦးအနေနှင့် လူမှုရေး လုံခြုံခွင့်ရယူပိုင့်ခွင့်ရှိသည့်အပြင် နိုင်ငံရေးကြိုးပမ်းမှုဖြင့်ဖြစ်စေ၊ နိုင်ငံတကာ ပူပေါင်းဆောင်ရွက်မှုဖြင့်ဖြစ်စေ၊ နိုင်ငံအသီးသီး၏ဖွဲ့စည်းပုံနှင့် လည်းကောင်း၊ သယံဇာတအင်အားနှင့်လည်းကောင်း ထိုလူ၏ ဂုဏ်သိက္ခာနှင့် စရိုက်လက္ခဏာ လွတ်လပ်စွာ တိုးတက်မြင့်မားရေးအတွက် မရှိမဖြစ်လိုအပ်သော စီးပွားရေး၊ လူမှုရေးနှင့် ယဉ်ကျေးမှု အခွင့်အရေးများကို သုံးစွဲပိုင်ခွင့်ရှိသည်။
__label__my လူတစ်ဦးတစ်ယောက်အား နိုင်ငံဥပဒေအရဖြစ်စေ၊ အပြည်ပြည်ဆိုင်ရာ ဥပဒေအရ ဖြစ်စေ၊ ပြစ်မှုမမြောက်သော လုပ်ရပ် သို့မဟုတ် ပျက်ကွက်မှုအရ ဆွဲဆိုပြစ်ပေးခြင်း မပြုရ။ ထို့အပြင် ပြစ်မှုကျူးလွန်စဉ်အခါက ထိုက်သင့်စေနိုင်သော အပြစ်ဒဏ်ထက်ပိုမိုကြီးလေးသော အပြစ်ဒဏ်ကို ထိုက်သင့်ခြင်းမရှိစေရ။
__label__my ထို့ပြင် လူတစ်ဦး တစ်ယောက် နေထိုင်ရာ နိုင်ငံ၏ သို့တည်းမဟုတ် နယ်မြေဒေသ၏ နိုင်ငံရေးဆိုင်ရာ ဖြစ်စေ စီရင် ပိုင်ခွင့်ဆိုင်ရာ ဖြစ်စေ တိုင်းပြည် အချင်းချင်း ဆိုင်ရာဖြစ်စေ၊ အဆင့်အတန်း တစ်ခုခုကို အခြေပြု၍ သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ ဒေသနယ်မြေတစ်ခုသည် အချုပ်အခြာ အာဏာပိုင် လွတ်လပ်သည့် နယ်မြေ၊ သို့တည်းမဟုတ် ကုလသမဂ္ဂ ထိန်းသိမ်း စောင့်ရှောက် ထားရသည့် နယ်မြေ၊ သို့တည်းမဟုတ် ကိုယ်ပိုင် အုပ်ချုပ်ခွင့် အာဏာတို့ တစိတ်တဒေသလောက်သာ ရရှိသည့် နယ်မြေ စသဖြင့် ယင်းသို့ သော နယ်မြေများ ဖြစ်သည်၊ ဖြစ်သည် ဟူသော အကြောင်းကို အထောက်အထား ပြု၍ သော်လည်းကောင်း ခွဲခြားခြင်း လုံးဝ မရှိစေရ။
__label__my ပြည်သူပြည်သားတို့၏ ဆန္ဒသည် အုပ်ချုပ် အာဏာ၏ အခြေခံဖြစ်ရမည်၊ အဆိုပါ ဆန္ဒကို အချိန်ကာလပိုင်းခြားလျက် စစ်မှန်သောရွေးကောက်ပွဲများဖြင့် ထင်ရှားစေရမည်။ ရွေးကောက် ပွဲများတွင်လည်း လူတိုင်းအညီအမျှ ဆန္ဒမဲ ပေးနိုင်ခွင့် ရှိရမည့်အပြင်၊ ထိုရွေးကောက်ပွဲများကို လျှို့ဝှက် မဲပေး စနစ်ဖြင့် ဖြစ်စေ၊ အလားတူ လွတ်လပ်သော မဲပေးစနစ် ဖြင့်ဖြစ်စေ၊ ကျင်းပရမည်။
__label__my ကမ္ဘာ့ကုလသမဂ္ဂအဖွဲ့ဝင် နိုင်ငံတို့သည် ကုလသမဂ္ဂအဖွဲ့နှင့်ပူးပေါင်း၍ လူအခွင့်အရေးများကိုလည်းကောင်း၊ အခြေခံလွတ်လပ်ခွင့် အခွင့်အရေးများကိုလည်းကောင်း၊ ကမ္ဘာ့တဝှမ်းလုံးတွင် ရိုသေလေးစား ကျင့်သုံးစောင့်စည်းကြခြင်းကို အားပေးမည်ဟု ကတိပြုပြီးဖြစ်သောကြောင့် လည်းကောင်း၊
__label__my လူတိုင်းတွင် မိမိနှင့်တကွ မိမိ၏ မိသားစုကျန်းမာရေးနှင့်တကွ ကိုယ်စိတ်နှစ်ဖြာ အေးချမ်းစွာ နေထိုင်နိုင်ရေး အတွက် အစာအဟာရ၊ အဝတ်အထည် နေအိမ်၊ ဆေးဝါး အကူအညီနှင့် လိုအပ်သည့် လူမှု အထောက်အပံ့များ ပါဝင်သော သင့်တော် လျှောက်ပတ်သည့် လူမှု အဆင့်အတန်းကို ရယူခံစားခွင့် ရှိသည်။ ထို့ပြင် အလုပ်လက်မဲ့ဖြစ်သော အခါ၌ သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ မကျန်းမမာဖြစ်သော အခါ၌ သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ ကိုယ်အင်္ဂါမစွမ်းမသန်ဖြစ်သော အခါ၌ သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ မုဆိုးမဖြစ်သော အခါ၌ သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ အသက်အရွယ်အိုမင်းသော အခါ၌ သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ မိမိကိုယ်တိုင်က မတတ်နိုင်သောအကြောင်းကြောင့် ဝမ်းစာ ရှာမှီးနိုင်သောနည်းလမ်း မရှိသော အခါ၌ သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ နေထိုင်စားသောက်ရေးအတွက် လုံခြုံစိတ်ချရမှု အခွင့်အရေးရှိသည်။
__label__my နိုင်ငံရေးနှင့် မပတ်သက်သည့် ပြစ်မှုများမှ သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ ကုလသမဂ္ဂ၏ ရည်ရွက်ချက်နှင့် သဘောတရား မှုများကို ဖီဆန်သော အမှုများမှ သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ အမှန် ပေါ်ပေါက် လာသော ပြစ်မှုကြောင့် တရားစွဲဆိုခြင်း ခံရသည့် အမှုအခင်းများတွင် အထက်ပါ အခွင့်အရေးကို အသုံးမပြုနိုင်စေရ။
__label__my လူတိုင်းသည် တူညီ လွတ်လပ်သော ဂုဏ်သိက္ခာဖြင့် လည်းကောင်း၊ တူညီလွတ်လပ်သော အခွင့်အရေးများဖြင့် လည်းကောင်း၊ မွေးဖွားလာသူများ ဖြစ်သည်။ ထိုသူတို့၌ ပိုင်းခြား ဝေဖန်တတ်သော ဉာဏ်နှင့် ကျင့်ဝတ် သိတတ်သော စိတ်တို့ရှိကြ၍ ထိုသူတို့သည် အချင်းချင်း မေတ္တာထား၍ ဆက်ဆံကျင့်သုံးသင့်၏။
__label__my သတို့သား နှင့် သတို့သမီး နှစ်ဦးနှစ်ဘက်၏ လွတ်လပ်သော သဘောဆန္ဒရှိမှသာလျှင် ထိမ်းမြားခြင်းကို ပြုရမည်။
__label__my မည်သူကိုမျှ အဖွဲ့အစည်းတစ်ခုသို့ ဝင်စေရန် အတင်းအကျပ်မပြုရ။
__label__my ဥပဒေအရ မဟုတ်လျှင်၊ မည်သူမျှ မိမိ၏ ပစ္စည်းဥစ္စာပိုင်ဆိုင်ခွင့်ကို စွန့်လွှတ်ခြင်း မခံစေရ။
__label__my လူတိုင်း၌ အသက်ရှင်ရန် လွတ်လပ်ခွင့်နှင့် လုံခြုံစိတ်ချခွင့် ရှိသည်။
__label__my အထွေထွေညီလာခံ က လူတိုင်းတွင် မိမိ၏နိုင်ငံ နယ်နိမိတ် အတွင်း၌ လွတ်လပ်စွာ သွားလာ ရွှေ့ပြောင်း နိုင်ခွင့်၊ နေထိုင်ခွင့်ရှိသည်။
__label__my မည်သူကိုမျှ ညှဉ်းပန်းနှိပ်စက်ခြင်း၊ သို့တည်းမဟုတ် ရက်စက်ကြမ်းကြုတ်စွာ လူမဆန်စွာ ဂုဏ်ငယ်စေသောဆက်ဆံမှု မပြုရ၊ သို့တည်းမဟုတ် အပြစ်ဒဏ် ပေးခြင်းမပြုရ။
__label__my လူတိုင်းသည်၊ နိုင်ငံ တစ်နိုင်ငံ၏ နိုင်ငံသားအဖြစ် ခံယူခွင့်ရှိသည်။
__label__my လူတိုင်းတွင် မိမိ၏နိုင်ငံရှိ ပြည်သူ့ ဝန်ထမ်းအဖွဲ့၌ ဝင်ရောက်နိုင်ရန် တူညီသည့်အခွင့် အရေးရှိသည်။
__label__my မိမိ၏စရိုက်လက္ခဏာ လွတ်လပ်စွာ ဖွံ့ဖြိုးတိုးတက်နိုင်သည့် တစ်ခုတည်းသော လူ့အသိုက်အဝန်း အတွက်လူတိုင်း၌ တာဝန် ရှိသည်။
__label__my ဥပဒေအရ မဟုတ်လျှင် မည်သူမျှ မိမိ၏ နိုင်ငံသားအဖြစ်ကို စွန့်လွှတ်ခြင်း မခံစေရ၊ နိုင်ငံသားအဖြစ် ပြောင်းလဲနိုင်သော အခွင့်အရေးကို လည်း ငြင်းပယ်ခြင်း မခံစေရ။
__label__my လူတိုင်းတွင် မိမိတစ်ဦး ချင်းသော်လည်းကောင်း၊ အခြားသူများနှင့် ဖက်စပ်၍ သော်လည်းကောင်း၊ ပစ္စည်းဥစ္စာ တို့ကို ပိုင်ဆိုင်ရန် အခွင့်အရေးရှိရမည်။
__label__my မည်သူမျှ ဥပဒေအရ မဟုတ်သော ဖမ်းဆီးခြင်းကို ဖြစ်စေ၊ ချုပ်နှောင်ခြင်းကို ဖြစ်စေ၊ ပြည်နှင်ခြင်းကို ဖြစ်စေ မခံစေရ။
__label__my လူတိုင်းတွင် မိမိအကျိုး ခံစားခွင့်ကို ကာကွယ်ရန် အလုပ်သမား အစည်းအရုံးများ ဖွဲ့စည်းခွင့်၊ ပါဝင် ဆောင်ရွက်ခွင့် ရှိသည်။
__label__my လူတိုင်းတွင် ဥပဒေအရာ၌ လူပုဂ္ဂိုလ်တစ်ဦး အဖြစ်ဖြင့် အရာခပ်သိမ်းတွင် အသိအမှတ် ပြုခြင်းကို ခံယူပိုင်ခွင့်ရှိသည်။
__label__dz བཞིནསྒྲུཔརབྱེདཔ རྒྱ་གར་ཉེན་རྟོག་པས་བོད་མི་བཞི་འཛིན་བཟུང་བྱས་ཡོད་པ་མ་ཟད། ལྡི་ལི་བོད་མི་གནས་སྡོད་བྱེད་ས་ཡོངས་ལ་ས་གནས་ཉེན་རྟོག་པས་དམ་བསྒྲགས་ཆེན་པོ་བྱེད་བཞིན་ཡོད་པའི་སྐོར། འདི་གའི་གསར་འགོད་པ་དཀར་མཛེས་བསོད་ནམས་དབང་འདུས་ལགས་ཀྱིས་བཏང་འབྱོར་བྱུང་བའི་གནས་ཚུལ་ཞིག་ལ་གས
__label__dz སྐུ་རྗེས་གུ་རུ་ལྷ་ཁང༌། དུས་རབས་བརྒྱད་པའི་ནང་ ལྕགས་མཁར་རྒྱལ་པོ་ སིནྡྷུ་རཱ་ཛ་མཆོག་ སྲས་ཤི་བའི་སྡུག་མ་ཐེག་པར་ཡུལ་ལྷ་གཞི་བདག་ལུ་ མནོལ་གྲིབ་བཏང་བའི་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་ གནས་བདག་ཁྲོས་ཏེ་ རྒྱལ་པོའི་བླ་སྲོག་བརྐུས་འབག་ནི་དེ་གིས་ སྐུ་གཟུགས་ལུ་བསྙུན་གཞི་ཐེབས་ཏེ་ སྨན་བཅོས་རིམ་གྲོ་ག་ཅི་འབད་རུང་ བསྙུན་གཞི་རྩ་ལས་དྭངས་མ་ཚུགས་པར་ བལ་ཡུལ་ཡང་ལེ་ཤོད་ལས་ གུ་རུ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ བུམ་ཐང་ལུ་གདན་འདྲེན་ཞུ་དགོཔ་བྱུང་ནུག།
__label__dz ཡབ་སྨད་ཀྱི་ལྡེ་གསུམ་གྱི་ཡ་གྱལ་འདོ་ལྡེ་ལ་སྲས་བཞི་བྱུང་བའི་བགྲེས་པ། འདི་དང་གཅུང་ཁྲི་ཆུང་གཉིས་ཀྱིས་སྔར་ཡུམ་བརྟན་རྒྱུད་ལ་ཤོར་བའི་ནོར་སྣ་ཁྱད་པར་ཅན་དགུ་ཞེས་པ་སྡེ། ཕས་ཕོག་པའི་གསེར་ཁྲི་ཆུ་དར་ཅན། གུད་པ་བང་སོ་ཅན། གསེར་སྐུ་ཆུ་རིས་ཅན་གསུམ་དང་། མས་ཕོག་པའི་ཟངས་ལྟེ་བ་ཅན། དངུལ་སྐྱོགས་ཤ་བ་ཅན། མེ་ཏོར་ཏི་ལིག་ཅན་གསུམ། སྤུན་ཟླས་ཕོག་པའི་མཚོན་བཤན་ཐུང་སྡེ་མིག་ཅན། སྲིང་མོས་རྟགས་ཕོག་པའི་མཆུར་གཡུ་འཆང་བ་ཅན། སྲིང་མོས་རྟགས་ཕོག་པའི་མཆུར་གཡུ་འཆང་བ་ཅན། བེར་དམར་ཀེ་ཚེ་བྱི་སྐེད་ཅན་བཅས་ཅན་དགུ་ཚུར་བླངས་ནས་ཕ་ཝ་དེ་སེར་དངུལ་གཞོང་ཕོར་ཁ་ཅན(ལ་ལས་དངུལ་སྐྱོགས་ཤ་བ་ཅན་དུ་བཞེད)ཐོབ་སྟེ་གཙང་དུ་ཕྱིར་ཕེབས། ཕ་ཝ་དེ་སེའི་རྒྱུད་པས་སྣུབས་ཡུལ་རོང་དང་། གཡག་སྡེ། ཉང་སྟོད། སྟག་ཚལ་བཅས་ཀྱི་ཡུལ་རྣམས་ལ་མངའ་མཛད་དོ། ། ༼དུང་དཀར་ཚིག་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ་༽ལས་བཏུས། དུང་དཀར་ཚིག་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ་
__label__dz བསམ་གྲུབ་ལྗོངས་མཁར་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་ཡུལ་ ཁོར་ཡུག མགྲོན་ཁང་། ལོ་རྒྱུས། ལོ་རྒྱུས། བསམ་གྲུབ་ལྗོངས་མཁར་རྫོང་འདི་རྫོང་གཞི་ཚུ་གི་ནང་ལས་གསརཔ་གཅིག་ཨིན་རུང་ཆགས་ས་འདི་འབྲུག་གི་ཁྲོམ་རྙིང་ཤོས་ནང་ལུ་ཆགས་ཏེ་ཡོདཔ་ཨིན། རྒྱ་གར་ཨ་སམ་དང་གཅིག་ཁར་ས་ཚམས་ཕོགཔ་ཨིནམ་དང་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ལས་མི་ཏར་མཐོ་ཚད་༢༠༠དང་༣༥༠༠ཡོདཔ་ཨིན། རྫོང་ཁག་འདི་སྔོན་གདུང་བསམ་རྒྱ་དྲུང་གི་བཞུགས་གནས་ཡང་ཨིན། ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ། ཡུལ་ཚོ། མིང་ཐོགས་ཚུལ། དུས་ཆེན། མི་སྣ། པར་རིས་བར་འཁྱམས། ཟིན་ཐོ་འམ་དཔྱད་གཞི། དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཀར་ཆག། ད་དུང་གཟིགས། ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས་དྲྭ་མཐུད། བསམ་གྲུབ་ལྗོངས་མཁར་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་འཛུལ་སྒོ་ བསམ་གྲུབ་ལྗོངས་མཁར་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག
__label__dz རྒྱ་བྱིའུ་ཆེན་པོ་ལྕགས་ཀྱི་ཆས་དང། བསེ་ཁྲབ་དབང་གི་ཆས། གཅན་གཟན་གཟིག་གི་ཆས། སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཆས། གདུག་པ་སྤྲུལ་གྱི་ཆས། དཔའ་བོ་སྟག་གི་ཆས། གཟི་མདངས་ཞིང་ལྤགས་ཀྱི་ཆས། དམར་གསལ་ཁྲག་གི་ཆས། རྩལ་ཆེན་སེང་གིའི་ཆས། གཏུམ་པ་དོམ་གྱི་ཆས་ཞེས་གསུངས་སོ། དེ་ལྟར་སྒྱུ་འཕྲུལ་རྔམ་གློག་ལྟར་ན་དཔལ་གྱི་ཆས་བརྒྱད། བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་ལྟར་ན། དཔལ་གྱི་ཆས་བཅུའོ། ། ༼དུང་དཀར་ཚིག་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ་༽ལས་བཏུས། དུང་དཀར་ཚིག་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ་
__label__dz ༉ ཤར་རིའི་རྩེ་ནས་ཁྲི་གདུགས་ཉི་མ།། འོད་ཟེར་སྐྱེ་འགྲོའི་དཔལ་དུ་ཤར་བས།། བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ།། མཐོང་ནས་པདྨའི་འདབ་བརྒྱ་བཞད་སོང་།། དམིགས་མེད་ཆོས་དབྱིངས་ཀློང་ནས་འཕོས་པའི།། མཆོག་གསུམ་སྣང་བ་ཞིང་འདིར་འབར་བས།། ཕན་བདེའི་དཔལ་ལ་སྤྱོད་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ།། མཐོང་ནས་ཡིད་དབང་དད་པས་འཕྲོག་སོང་།། མཚན་ལྡན་བླ་མའི་ཞལ་གྱི་ངོས་ནས།། ཟབ་ཆོས་བདུད་རྩི་སྙིང་ལ་སིམ་པས།། གཟུང་འཛིན་དབྱིངས་སུ་དག་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ།། མཐོང་ནས་རིག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྒྱས་སོང་།། སྐྱེ་མེད་ཆོས་དབྱིངས་དག་པའི་ཀློང་ནས།། འགགས་མེད་གཟུགས་སྐུའི་རོལ་པར་ཤར་ཚེ།། འཁོར་བ་དོང་ནས་སྤྲུགས་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ།། མཐོང་ནས་འཁོར་འདས་གཅིག་ཏུ་འདྲེས་སོང་།། །།
__label__dz ༉ འཛོམས་འཛོམས་དགའ་སྐྱིད་ཕུན་ཚོགས་ལྷན་ཅིག་འཛོམས།། སྐད་གཅིག་མི་རྟག་འདུས་བྱས་སོ་སོར་སོང་།། སླར་ཡང་ལས་དང་སྨོན་ལམ་རང་དབང་གིས།། དགའ་སྐྱིད་ཕུན་ཚོགས་ཞལ་རས་ལྷན་ཅིག་འཛོམས།། གནམ་ལས་ཤར་བའི་ཉི་ཟླ་གཟའ་སྐར་རྣམས།། སྔ་ཕྱི་དུས་ཚོད་གླིང་བཞི་བསྐོར་བར་སོང་།། སླར་ཡང་གདུལ་བྱའི་སྨོན་ལམ་རང་དབང་གིས།། དགུང་སྔོན་མཐོན་པོར་འཛོམས་པ་ཡ་མཚན་ཆེ།། ནམ་མཁའི་རྒྱན་དུ་གྱུར་པ་སེམས་རེ་དགའ།། དབང་ཆེན་གསེར་གྱི་ས་གཞི་དྭངས་རེ་སྤྲོ།། རྒྱལ་ཁབ་དམ་ཆོས་དར་བ་བཀྲ་རེ་ཤིས།། མངའ་འབངས་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་འཛོམས་པ་གཡང་རེ་ཆགས།། །།
__label__dz བློན་པོ་ འཇིགས་མེད་ འོད་ཟེར་ཕྲིན་ལས། མི་རྗེ་ བློན་པོ་ མཆོག་ སྤྱི་ལོ་ ༡༩༥༢ ལུ་ བུམ་ཐང་ལུ་ སྐུ་འཁྲུངས་ཡོདཔ་དང་ ཀ་ལིམ་པོང་ལུ་ཡོད་པའི་ ཌི་ཨར་ ག་ར་ཧམསི་ ཧོམསི་ ནང་ལས་སྐུ་ཡོན་སྦྱང་ནི་འགོ་བཙུགས་གནང་ཏེ་ སེནཏ་ ཨིསི་ཊེ་ཕེནི་་སློབ་གྲྭ་ནང་ལས་ མཐོ་རིམ་སྐུ་ཡོན་ མཐར་འཁྱོལ་གནང་ནུག། དེའི་ཤུལ་ལས་ ཡུ་ཨེསི་ཨེ་ གི་ པེན་ ཨིསི་ཊེཊ་ གཙུག་ལག་སློབ་སྡེ་ནང་ལས་ མི་མང་བདག་སྐྱོང་ནང་ གཙུག་ལག་མཐོ་རིམ་སྐུ་ཡོན་མཐར་འཁྱོལ་ཞིནམ་ལས་ གཞི་གཡོག་ནང་འགོ་དང་པ་ ༡༩༧༤ ལུ་ འཛུལ་བཞུགས་གནང་བའི་ཤུལ་ལུ་ མི་ལོ་ ༣༤ གི་རིང་ལུ་ ལྷན་ཁག་དང་ལས་ཁུངས་ ལེ་ཤ་ཅིག་ནང་ ཕྱག་ལཱ་གནང་ནུག། བློན་པོ་མཆོག་ རྒྱལ་གཞུང་གཞི་གཡོག་ལྷན་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་འགོ་དཔོན་དང་ ཤེས་རིག་ལྷན་ཁག་གི་ མདོ་ཆེན་ ནིའུ་ཡོཀ་ལུ་ཡོད་པའི་ འཛམ་གླིང་སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ནང་ འབྲུག་གི་སྐུ་ཚབ་ ཨིནམ་དང་ སྤྱི་ལོ་ ༡༩༨༧ ལུ་ མི་རྗེ་བློན་པོ་མཆོག་ལུ་ མི་དབང་འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་བཞི་པ་མཆོག་གིས་ བུ་རས་ དམརཔོ་གནང་ཡོདཔ་དང་ ༡༩༩༤ ལུ་ ཇེ་ནི་བ་ལུ་ འཛམ་གླིང་སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་གཏན་རྒྱགས་ཀྱི་ སྐུ་ཚབ་སྦེ་བཀོད་གནང་ནུག། སྤྱི་ལོ་ ༡༩༩༨ ལུ་ རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་ཚོགས་འདུ་ཆེན་མོ་ནང་ལས་ ཕྱི་འབྲེལ་བློན་པོ་སྦེ་བཙག་འཐུ་གནང་ཡོདཔ་དང་ སྤྱི་ལོ་ ༡༩༩༩ ལུ་ བློན་པོ་མཆོག་ མི་དབང་འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་བཞི་པ་མཆོག་གིས་ འབྲུག་ཐུགས་སྲས་དང་ ཁྲི་མངའ་གསོལ་གྱི་རྟགས་མ་གནང་ནུག། འབྲུག་ཡུལ་ བློན་པོ་
__label__dz ༉ སྐྱིད་པའི་འབྲུག་གཡུས་ཙན་དན་བཀོད་པའི་གནས།། ཤར་ནས་ཙཱ་རི་གནས་ཀྱིས་ཞིང་ཁམས་འགྲན།། ལྷོ་ནས་བྱང་ཐང་པདྨས་མཛེས་པར་བརྒྱན།། ནུབ་ནས་སྦས་ཡུལ་ཕུག་གིས་བདེ་བར་བཀོད།།བྱང་ནས་གངས་ཆེན་རི་རབ་རྭ་བས་བསྐོར།། དབུས་ན་སྐྱེད་ཚལ་བཟང་པོའི་གནས་མཆོག་ཏུ།། བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཕུན་ཚོགས་ཞིང་ཁམས་ལྟ་བུའི་གནས།། རང་དབང་རང་བཙན་གཙང་མའི་ལྡུམ་ར་འདྲ།། སྒྲ་སྙན་ཚིག་གིས་བརྒྱན་པའི་ཞབས་བྲོ་འདི།། བཀྲིས་དགའ་སྟོན་འགྱེད་པའི་དུས་སུ་ཕུལ།། འདིར་ཚོགས་ལྷ་མི་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་སྙན་སྒྲོན་དུ།། བདེ་ལེགས་བཟང་པོའི་དར་དང་བཅས་ཏེ་ཕུལ།། །།
__label__dz ལྷ་ཁང་གི་མཚན་བྱམས་པ་ལྷ་ཁང་ཟེར་ཞུ་དགོ་མི་དེ་ཡང་ དེ་ནང་ནང་རྟེན་གཙོ་བོ་མ་འོངས་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས་ཇོ་བོ་བྱམས་པ་བཞུགས་ཡོད་མི་ལུ་བརྟེན་ཏེ་ དེ་སྦེ་གསོལ་བའི་ལོ་རྒྱུས་འདུག། སྐུ་འདྲ་འདི་བཙོང་བཙན་སྒམ་པོ་ཁོ་ར་གིས་བཙུགས་གནང་ཡོདཔ་སྦེ་ཡིད་ཆེ་བསྐྱེད་དོ་ཡོདཔ་དང་ དེའི་གཡས་གཡོན་ལུ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་པ་བཞི་གིས་སྐོར་ཏེ་ཡོདཔ་ཨིན།
__label__dz རྗེ་གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ཆེན་པོ་ལྕགས་ཟམ་པ་ཐང་སྟོང་རྒྱལ་པོ [1361?-1485] འབྲེལ་གཏུགས ཆོས་སྐད མཛད་པ་པོ: ཤེས་རབ་དཔལ་ལྡན; མིང: རྗེ་གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ཆེན་པོ་ལྕགས་ཟམ་པའི་རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པ་ངོ་ཚར་རྒྱ་མཚོ། མཛད་པ་པོ: ལོ་ཆེན་འགྱུར་མེད་བདེ་ཆེན [1540-1615] ; མིང: གྲུབ་པའི་དབང་ཕྱུག་ཆེན་པོ་ལྕགས་ཟམ་པ་ཐང་སྟོན་རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྣམ་ཐར་ཀུན་གསལ་ནོར་བུའི་མེ་ལོང་གསར་པ། TBRC W23929 དབྱིན་སྐད མཛད་པ་པོ: Gerner, Manfred; མིང: Chakzampa Thangtong Gyalpo [ISBN 99936-14-39-4] - དཔལ་འབྲུག་ཞིབ་འཇུག་ལྟེ་བ མཛད་པ་པོ: Stearns, Cyrus; མིང: King of The Empty Plan: The Tibetan Iron Bridge Builder Tangtong Gyalpo [ISBN 978-1-55939-275-4] འབྲེལ་མཐུད TBRC P2778 ཐང་སྟོང་རྒྱལ་པོ - ནང་བསྟན་དཔེ་ཚོཊ་ལྟེ་གནས ཐང་སྟོང་རྒྱལ་པོ - རང་འབྱུང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཝི་ཀི ཐང་སྟོང་རྒྱལ་པོ - རིག་པ་ཝི་ཀི བླ་མ་ཐང་སྟོང་རྒྱལ་པོ - ཧི་མ་ལ་ཡན་གྱི་ ལག་རྩལ་འབྱུང་ཁུངས མི་མང་ : ནང་པ
__label__dz ༈ ཚེ་སྒྲུབ་ནི། འཇིག་རྟེན་འདྲེན་པའི་གཙོ་བོ་ཚེ་དཔག་མེད། །དུས་མིན་འཆི་བ་མ་ལུས་འཇོམས་པའི་དཔལ། །མགོན་མེད་སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱུར་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་སྐྱབས། །སངས་རྒྱས་ཚེ་དཔག་མེད་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ལོ། །ཨོཾ་ན་མོ་བྷ་ག་ཝ་ཏེ། ཨ་པ་རི་མི་ཏ་ཨཱ་ཡུཛྙཱ་ན་སུ་བི་ནིཉྩི་ཏ་ཏེ་ཛོ་རཱ་ཛཱ་ཡ། ཏ་ཐཱ་ག་ཏཱ་ཡ། ཨརྷ་ཏེ་སམྱཀྶཾ་བུདྡྷཱ་ཡ། ཏདྱ་ཐཱ། ཨོཾ་པུ་ཎྱེ་པུ་ཎྱེ་མཧཱ་པུ་ཎྱེ། ཨ་པ་རི་མི་ཏ་པུ་ཎྱེ་ཨ་པ་རི་མི་ཏ་པུ་ཎྱེ་ཛྙཱ་ན་སམྦྷ་རོ་པ་ཙི་ཏེ། ཨོཾ་སརྦ་སཾ་སྐ་ར་པ་རི་ཤུདྡྷ་དྷརྨ་ཏེ་ག་ག་ན་ས་མུངྒ་ཏེ་སྭ་བྷཱ་ཝ་བི་ཤུདྡྷེ་མཧཱ་ན་ཡ་པ་རི་ཝཱ་རེ་སྭཱཧཱ།འཇིག་རྟེན་འདྲེན་པའི་གཙོ་བོ་ཚེ་དཔག་མེད། །དུས་མིན་འཆི་བ་མ་ལུས་འཇོམས་པའི་དཔལ། །མགོན་མེད་སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱུར་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་སྐྱབས། །སངས་རྒྱས་ཚེ་དཔག་མེད་ཀྱི་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཤོག །ཚེ་ལོ་བརྒྱ་ཐུབ་ཅིང་སྟོན་བརྒྱ་མཐོང་བ་དང་། །ཚེ་རིང་ནད་མེད་བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས། །ཐེག་པ་མཆོག་ལ་ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་གྱུར་པའི། །བཀྲ་ཤིས་དེས་ཀྱང་དེང་འདིར་བདེ་ལེགས་ཤོག། །།
__label__dz ༄༅། །བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་མི་འཁྲུགས་པའི་སྒོ་ནས་རུས་ཆོག་བྱ་ཚུལ་བཞུགས་སོ།། ༈ ན་མོ་གུ་རུ་ཝེ། འདིར་རུས་ཆོག་བྱ་ཚུལ་ནི། མདུན་གྱི་སྟེགས་ཀྱི་ཁར་གཏོར་མ་དང་བུམ་པ་གཅིག་གམ་གཉིས་དྲི་བཟང་དང་འོ་མས་བཀང་ལ་དེའི་མདུན་དུ་མཆོད་པ་དྲུག་ཚར་གསུམ་བཤམས། ཉེ་ལེགས་སུ་སྣོད་གཙང་མའི་ནང་སེང་རས་དཀར་པོ་བཏིང་བའི་སྟེང་དུ་རུས་རྣམས་བཞག །བདག་བསྐྱེད་བཟླས་པ་ཡན་ལག་གཞུང་བཞིན་བཏང་། དེ་ནས་བུམ་བསྐྱེད་ལ་འཇུག་སྔགས་ཕྲེང་བཀོད་ལུགས་ནི། བུམ་ལྷའི་ཐུགས་ཀའི་ཟླ་བ་ལ་གནས་པའི་ཧཱུཾ་ཡིག་སྔགས་འཕྲེང་དང་བཅས་པ་ལས་བདུད་རྩིའི་རྒྱུན་བབ་པས་གང་བར་གྱུར། ཀཾ་ཀ་ནི་ཅི་ནུས་བཟླས་པའི་རྗེས་སུ། བུམ་ལྷའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་པ་རང་གནས་སུ་གཤེགས་དམ་ཚིག་པ་བུམ་ཆུ་དང་རོ་གཅིག་ཏུ་གྱུར་ཅེས་བརྗོད། ཆ་གསུམ་བཏང་། དེ་ནས་རུས་རྣམས་ཀྱི་སྟེང་དུ་པཾ་ལས་པདྨའི་སྡོང་པོ་དེའི་སྟེང་དུ་ཨ་ལས་ཟླ་བ་ལ་གནས་པའི་ཧཱུཾ་ཡིག་སྔགས་ཕྲེང་དང་བཅས་པ་ལས་བདུད་རྩིའི་རྒྱུན་བབ་པས་ཆེ་གེ་མོའི་སྡིག་སྒྲིབ་ཐམས་ཅད་དུད་ཁུ་དང་སོལ་ཁུའི་རྣམ་པར་བྱང་ཞིང་དག་པར་གྱུར། ན་མོ་རཏྣ་ཏྲ་ཡ༴ སཏཱ་ནཉྩ་ཆེ་གེ་མོའི་སྡིག་སྒྲིབ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཤིནྟཾ་ཀུ་རུ་སྭཱཧཱ། ཞེས་བརྗོད་ནས་རུས་བུ་རྣམས་བུམ་ཆུས་བཀྲུའོ། །བསྡུས་ན་དེས་ཆོག་གོ །ཞེས་པའང་དགེ་རིན་པས་སོ། ། Reference དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་གསུང་རབ། ༢༠༠༩ དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་ལུགས་ཀྱི་ཞལ་འདོན་ཕྱོགས་བསྡེབས་བྱང་ཆུབ་མགྲོད་པའི་ལམ་བཟང་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་བཞུགས་སོ། ཏཱའི་པེ། ཏཱའི་ཝཱན།
__label__dz པེ་དྲ་ད་མི་ན་རྩེ་(Pedra da Mina)མན་ཅི་ཀེའི་ར་རི་རྒྱུད་གྱི་རི་རྩེ་མི་ནས་ཞེ་རའིས་ནང་བྲ་ཛིལ་ནང་ཨིན།་སན་པའུ་ལོ་དང་མི་ནས་ཞེ་རའིས་གྱི་སམ་ཚམས་འདུག།་རི་རྩེ་དེ་མཐོ་ཚེད་༢༧༩༧mའདུག་དང་སན་པའུ་ལོ་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་དང་མན་ཅི་ཀེའི་རའི་རྩེ་མཐོ་ཤོས་འདུག༎ See Also ཨ་གུ་ལྷས་ནེ་གྲས་རྩེ་ མན་ཅི་ཀེའི་ར་རི་རྒྱུད་ བྲ་ཛིལ་ཀྱི་ས་ཁ་མཐོ་ས་ བྲ་ཛིལ་ འཛམ་གླིང་རྒྱས་བཤད བཱརཱ་ཛིལ་
__label__dz བོད་དམ་ཡང་ན་བོད་ཡུལ་ནི་སྟོད་མངའ་རིས་སྐོར་གསུམ་དང་བར་དབུས་གཙང་རུ་བཞི། སྨད་མདོ་ཁམས་སྒང་དྲུག་བཅས་ལ་གོ། ད་ལྟའི་ཆར་བོད་ཅེས་པར་ཆབ་སྲིད་ཀྱི་གོ་བ་དང་མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་གོ་བ་གཉིས་ལེན་གྱི་ཡོད་པ་རེད། སྔ་མ་ནི་རྒྱ་ནག་གིས་བགོས་པའི་བོད་རང་སྐྱོང་ལྗོངས་ཁོངས་གཅིག་པུ་ལ་གོ་བ་དང་། ཕྱི་མ་ནི་བོད་རིགས་འདུས་པའི་བོད་ཆེན་པོའི་ཡུལ་གྲུ་ཡོངས་ལ་གོ་བ་ལེན་དགོས།བོད་ད་ལྟ་གནས་པའི་ཞིང་ཆེན་ནི། སི་ཁྲོན་དང་ཡོན་ནན། མཚོ་སྔོན། ཀན་སུ།བོད་ལྗོངས་ལྔ་རུ་བགོས་ཡོད། ཨེ་ཤ་ཡའི་ཤར་དབུས། ཧི་མ་ལ་ཡའི་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ནུབ་ངོས་སུ་གནས་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཅིག་ཡིན། མི་རིགས། བོད་པ། སྐད་ཡིག བོད་སྐད་དང་བོད་ཡིག ཆོས་རྒྱུད། བན་དང་བོན། ས་གནས་དབྱེ་བ། ཆོལ་གསུམ་སྟེ། དབུས་གཙང་དང་། ཁམས། ཨ་མདོ། དེ་ཡང་དབུས་གཙང་ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཆོལ་ཁ། མདོ་སྟོད་མི་ཡི་ཆོལ་ཁ། མདོ་སྨད་རྟ་ཡི་ཆོལ་ཁ་ཟེར་སྲོལ་ཡོད། ཡང་ན། སྟོད་མངའ་རིས་སྐོར་གསུམ་དང་། བར་དབུས་གཙང་རི་བཞི། སྨད་མདོ་ཁམས་སྒང་དྲུག་ཟེར། ད་ལྟ་གནསསྐ་བས་ཤིག་ལ་རྒྱ་ནག་ནག་གིས་དབང་སྒྱུར་འོག་གནས་ཡོད། ལྷ་ས་ བོད་སྐད
__label__dz ༄༅། །མར་མེ་སྨོན་ལམ་བཞུགས་སོ།། ༈ ཨོཾ་ཨཱཿཧཱུཾ། རིན་ཆེན་ཀོང་བུ་སྟོང་གསུམ་འཇིག་རྟེན་གྱི། །ཁོར་ཡུག་ཆེན་པོའི་ཚད་དང་མཉམ་པའི་ནང་། །ཞུན་མར་མཐའ་ཡི་རྒྱ་མཚོ་འཁྱིལ་བའི་ཀློང་། །སྡོང་བུ་རི་རྒྱལ་ལྷུན་དུ་ཆགས་པའི་རྩེར། །ཡེ་ཤེས་རང་མདངས་གསལ་བའི་སྒྲོན་མེ་སྦར། །འོད་ཀྱིས་ཁམས་གསུམ་སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི། །མ་རིག་མུན་པ་བསལ་ཞིང་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི། །སྣང་བས་སེམས་ཀྱི་དེ་ཉིད་མཐོང་བར་ཤོག། །གྲངས་ནི་རྡུལ་སྙེད་སངས་རྒྱས་རེ་རེའི་མདུན། །མར་མེ་ཐོགས་པའི་ལྷ་མོ་དེ་སྙེད་དུ། །སྤྲོས་པས་མུ་མེད་ཕྱོགས་བཅུའི་ཞིང་ཐམས་ཅད། །རྒྱས་པར་བཀང་སྟེ་ཚོགས་གཉིས་རྫོགས་པར་ཤོག། །སྣང་གསལ་མར་མེ་འདི་ཡི་བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱིས། །བདག་སོགས་འཁོར་བའི་མུན་པར་ལྷུང་བ་རྣམས། །སྣང་ནས་སྣང་བའི་མཐར་ཐུག་མྱུར་བགྲོད་དེ། །ཀུན་མཁྱེན་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྣང་བ་ཐོབ་པར་ཤོག། །ཅེས་པའང་ཁུ་བོ་དབུ་མཛད་ཀྱི་ངོར་དགེ་རིན་པས་སོ།།
__label__dz ༄༅། །བསམ་པ་མྱུར་འགྲུབ་མ་བཞུགས་སོ།། ༄༅། །ཨེ་མ་ཧོ༔ མཚོ་དབུས་གེ་སར་པདྨའི་སྡོང་པོ་ལ། །སྐུ་ལྔ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པའི་ལྷ། །རང་བྱུང་ཆེན་པོ་པདྨ་ཡབ་ཡུམ་ནི། །མཁའ་འགྲོའི་སྤྲིང་ཕུང་འཁྲིགས་ལ་གསོལ་བ་འདེབས། །བསམ་པ་མྱུར་དུ་འགྲུབ་པར་བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབས། །ལས་ངན་སྤྱད་པའི་རྣམ་སྨིན་མཐུས་བསྐྱེད་པའི། །ནད་གདོན་བར་ཆད་དམག་འཁྲུག་མུ་གེའི་ཚོགས། །ཁྱོད་ཞལ་དྲན་པའི་མོད་ལ་ཟད་བྱེད་པའི། །ཞལ་བཞེས་སྙིང་ནས་བསྐུལ་ལོ་ཨུ་རྒྱན་རྗེ། །བསམ་པ་མྱུར་དུ་འགྲུབ་པར་བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབས། །དད་དང་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་གཏོང་ལ་གོམས་པ་དང་། །ཐོས་པས་རྒྱུད་གྲོལ་ཁྲེལ་ཡོད་ངོ་ཚ་ཤེས། །ཤེས་རབ་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པའི་ནོར་བདུན་པོ། །སེམས་ཅན་ཀུན་གྱི་རྒྱུད་ལ་རབ་ཞུགས་ནས། །འཇིག་རྟེན་བདེ་སྐྱིད་ལྡན་པར་དབུགས་འབྱིན་མཛོད། །བསམ་པ་མྱུར་དུ་འགྲུབ་པར་བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབས། །གང་ལ་ནད་དང་སྡུག་བསྔལ་མི་འདོད་རྐྱེན། །འབྱུང་པོའི་གདོན་དང་རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཆད་པ་དང་། །མེ་ཆུ་གཅན་གཟན་ལམ་འཕྲང་འཇིགས་པ་སོགས། །ཚེ་ཡི་ཕ་མཐར་ཐུག་པའི་གནས་སྐབས་ཀུན། །སྐྱབས་དང་རེ་ས་གཞན་ན་མ་མཆིས་པས། །ཐུགས་རྗེས་ཟུངས་ཤིག་གུ་རུ་ཨུ་རྒྱན་རྗེ། །བསམ་པ་མྱུར་དུ་འགྲུབ་པར་བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབས། །ཨུ་རྒྱན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ལ་གསོལ་བ་འདེབས། །འགལ་རྐྱེན་བར་ཆད་མི་འབྱུང་ཞིང་། །མཐུན་རྐྱེན་བསམ་པ་འགྲུབ་པ་དང་། །མཆོག་དང་མཐུན་མོང་དངོས་གྲུབ་སྩོལ།།
__label__dz ༄༅། །སྨོན་ལམ་གྲུབ་རྒྱལ་མ་བཞུགས་སོ།། ༄༅། །བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་སྨོན་ལམ་གྲུབ་པའི་རྒྱལ་པོ་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ལོ། །ལས་དང་གློ་བུར་རྐྱེན་ལས་གྱུར་པ་ཡི། །གདོན་དང་ནད་དང་འབྱུང་པོའི་འཚེ་བ་སོགས། །སེམས་ཅན་ཡིད་མི་བདེ་བའི་ནད་རྣམས་ཀུན། །འཇིག་རྟེན་ཁམས་སུ་འབྱུང་བར་མ་གྱུར་ཅིག །ཇི་ལྟར་གཤེད་མས་ཁྲིད་པའི་བསད་བྱ་བཞིན། །སྐད་ཅིག་གཅིག་ལ་ལུས་སེམས་འབྲལ་བྱེད་པའི། །སྲོག་འཕྲོག་ནད་ཀྱི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཇི་སྙེད་པ། །འཇིག་རྟེན་ཁམས་སུ་འབྱུང་བར་མ་གྱུར་ཅིག །འཆི་བདག་གཤིན་རྗེའི་ཁ་ནང་ཚུད་པ་ལྟར། །ནད་ཀྱི་མིང་ཙམ་ཐོས་པས་སྐྲག་བྱེད་པའི། །ཉིན་གཅིག་པ་དང་རྟག་པའི་རིམ་སོགས་ཀྱིས། །ལུས་ཅན་ཀུན་ལ་གནོད་པ་མ་གྱུར་ཅིག །གནོད་པའི་བགེགས་རིགས་སྟོང་ཕྲག་བརྒྱད་ཅུ་དང་། །གློ་བུར་ཡི་འབྲོག་སུམ་བརྒྱ་དྲུག་ཅུ་དང་། །བཞི་བརྒྱ་རྩ་བཞིའི་ནད་ལ་སོགས་པ་ཡིས། །ལུས་ཅན་ཀུན་ལ་འཚེ་བ་མ་གྱུར་ཅིག །ལུས་སེམས་བདེ་བ་མ་ལུས་འཕྲོག་བྱེད་པའི། །འབྱུང་བཞི་འཁྲུགས་པའི་སྡུག་བསྔལ་ཇི་སྙེད་པ། །མ་ལུས་ཞི་ཞིང་མདངས་སྟོབས་ལྡན་གྱུར་ནས། །ཚེ་རིང་ནད་མེད་བདེ་སྐྱིད་ལྡན་པར་ཤོག། །བླ་མ་དཀོན་མཆོག་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཐུགས་རྗེ་དང་། །མཁའ་འགྲོ་ཆོས་སྐྱོང་སྲུང་མའི་མཐུ་སྟོབས་དང་། །ལས་འབྲས་བསླུ་བ་མེད་པའི་བདེན་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས། །སྨོན་ལམ་ཇི་ལྟར་བཏབ་པ་འགྲུབ་གྱུར་ཅིག།
__label__dz ༑ ལྷ་མོའི་བཟློག་པ་ནི། དེ་ལྟར་མ་མོ་འཁོར་བཅས་ཀྱི། །ཐུགས་དམ་བསྐང་བའི་བྱིན་རླབས་ཀྱིས། །རིག་འཛིན་རྣལ་འབྱོར་བདག་ཅག་ལ། །མཁའ་འགྲོའི་ཉམས་ཆག་བྱུང་བ་སྐོངས། །འཇིག་རྟེན་མཁའ་འགྲོའི་གནོད་པ་བཟློག །མ་མོའི་ཡམས་ནད་བྱུང་བ་བཟློག །གཤིན་རྗེའི་ཁྲམ་ལ་བཏབ་པ་བཟློག །བདུད་ཀྱི་ཞགས་པ་ནག་པོ་ཆོད། །བནྡྷེའི་བྱད་ཁ་སླད་ལ་བསྒྱུར། །སྡེ་བརྒྱད་གནོད་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་བཟློག །གཞན་གྱི་རྦད་འདྲེའི་ཕུར་ཁ་བཟློག། །རྨི་ལྟས་མཚན་མ་ངན་པ་བསྒྱུར། །ལོ་སྐག་ཟླ་སྐེག་ཞག་སྐེག་བསྒྱུར། །སྡང་བའི་དགྲ་དང་གནོད་པའི་བགེགས། །བདུད་དང་བར་དུ་གཅོད་པའི་ཚོགས། །ཐམས་ཅད་ཐལ་བའི་རྡུལ་དུ་རློག །བདག་ཅག་རྣལ་འབྱོར་འཁོར་བཅས་ཀྱི། །དམ་ཚིག་ཉམས་པ་སྐོངས་གྱུར་ཅིག །མཆོག་དང་ཐུན་མོང་ལ་སོགས་པའི། །དངོས་གྲུབ་མ་ལུས་སྩལ་དུ་གསོལ། །ཚེ་དང་དབང་ཕྱུག་སྤེལ་དུ་གསོལ། །དཔལ་དང་གྲགས་པ་སྒྲུབ་ཏུ་གསོལ། །འཁོར་དང་བསྟན་པ་བསྲུང་དུ་གསོལ། །ལེགས་དང་སྤྲོད་ལ་ཉེས་དང་བསྣོལ། །བསམ་པ་སྒྲུབས་ལ་རེ་བ་སྐོངས། །མཐུ་སྟོབས་སྐྱེད་ལ་དཔུང་གཉེན་མཛོད། །ལུས་དང་གྲིབ་མ་བཞིན་དུ་འགྲོགས། །ཉིན་དང་མཚན་མོ་བྱ་ར་མཛོད། །གཞན་ཡང་ཡིད་ལ་གང་འདོད་པ། །དེ་ནི་ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས་སྒྲུབ་པར་མཛོད། །བགེགས་རིགས་སྟོང་ཕྲག་བརྒྱད་ཅུ་ཞི་བ་དང་། །མི་མཐུན་གནོད་པའི་རྐྱེན་དང་བྲལ་བ་དང་། །མཐུན་པ་བསྒྲུབ་ཅིང་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པ་ཡི། །བཀྲ་ཤིས་དེས་ཀྱང་དེང་འདིར་བདེ་ལེགས་ཤོག །གཞན་ཡང་སྐྱེ་བ་འདི་ཉིད་ལ། །མི་མཐུན་ཚོགས་རྣམས་ཞི་བ་དང་། །ཚེ་རིང་ནད་མེད་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས། །རྟག་ཏུ་བདེ་བ་ཐོབ་པར་ཤོག། །།
__label__dz བློདདབྲོ་ཙུག་སྒྲ་ལྷ་སྣང་དང་ངན་འབྲས་ནི་སྐམ་སའི་ཐོག་སྐྱེ་དངོས་ཀྱི་གྲངས་ཀའི་བརྒྱ་ཆ་དགུ་བཅུ་རྩ་མེད་དུ་འགྲོ་སྲིད་པ་དང་།སྐྱེ་དངོས་ཁྲི་བཞི་བརྒྱ་ལྔ་བཅུ་རྩ་མེད་དུ་འགྲོ་སྲིད།འཛམ་གླིང་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་བརྒྱ་ཆ་བདུན་ཅུའི་ཚྭ་མེད་ཆུ་ཕན་ཐོགས་མེད་པར་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆེན་པོར་འབབ་སྲིད།མིའི་རིགས་ལ་ཆུའི་ཉེན་ཁ་འབྱུང་ཞིང་སྐོམ་སའི་ཐོག་གི་བརྒྱ་ཆ་དག་བཅུའི་སྲོག་ཆགས་དང་སྐྱེ་དངོས་ཆུ་གསོག་ཉར་བྱེད་ཡས་ནགས་ཚལ་མེད་སྟབས་ཐན་པའི་ཉེན་ཁ་ཡོང་ཉེན་ཡོད།ས་གཞི་ཆེན་པོ་བྱེ་ཐང་དུ་འགྱུར་བའི་སྣང་ཚུལ་འབྱུང་།ས་ཁུལ་མང་པོར་རླུང་ཤུགས་བརྒྱ་ཆ་དྲུག་ཅུ་ནས་བདུན་ཅུ་བར་ཇེ་ཆེར་ཕྱིན་ནས་མི་གྲངས་དུང་ཕྱུར་མང་པོ་རླུང་སྐྱོན་གྱིས་རྩ་མེད་དུ་གཏོང་སྲིད།ས་ཁུལ་མང་པོར་ཆུའི་གནོད་འཚེ་འབྱུང་ཞིང་ས་ཞིང་དང་གྲོང་ཁྱེར་མང་པོ་ཆུས་སྣུབ།མིའི་རིགས་ཀྱིས་ཤིང་ཆ་དང་ཞིང་ཞོར་ཐོན་རྫས་བཅས་རགས་ཐབས་མེད་པས།དཔལ་སབྱོར་འཚོ་བའི་ཐད་དཀའ་ངལ་ཆེནགཔོ་ཐུག་སྲིད་པ་རེད།དེའི་ཐོག་མཁའ་རླུང་སྦགས་བཙོག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ་དང་སྒྲ་འཛེར་གྱི་ཅ་ཅོས་ཁེངས།ཉི་འོད་འཕྲོ་ཤུགས་ཇེ་ཆེར་འགྲོ་བ་བཅས འབྲུག་ཡུལ་
__label__dz དངོས་ཁམས་རིག་པ་ནི་དངོས་རྫས་ཀྱི་ཆགས་ཚུལ་དང་ཕན་ཚུན་བྱེད་ནུས། འགུལ་སྐྱོད་སོགས་ཀྱི་གཞི་རྩའི་གནས་ལུགས་ལ་ཞིབ་འཇུག་བྱེད་པའི་རང་བྱུང་ཚན་རིག་ཅིག་ཡིན། དེ་ལ་ཤུགས་རིག་པ་དང་། ཚ་བ་རིག་པ། གློག་སྡུད་རིག་པ། འོད་རིག་པ། ཚད་རྡུལ་ཤུགས་རིག བལྟོས་བཅས་སྨྲ་བ་ལ་སོགས་པའི་ནང་གསེས་འགའ་རུ་བགོ་སྲོལ་ཡོད།
__label__dz ཧཱ་རྫོང་ཁག་འདི་ འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་འདི་ནང་རྫོང་ཁག་ 20 ཡོད་པའི་གྲལ་ལས་ ནུབ་ཕྱོགས་མངའ་སྡེའི་རྫོང་ཁག་ཅིག་ཡིན། སྦྱིས་རྒེད་འོག སྐར་ཚོགས་རྒེད་འོག དབུས་སུ་རྒེད་འོག ས་དམར་རྒེད་འོག གསང་སྦས་རྒེད་འོག དགའ་སྐྱིད་གླིང་རྒེད་འོག ཁོར་ཡུག མགྲོན་ཁང་། ལོ་རྒྱུས། ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ། ཡུལ་ཚོ། མིང་ཐོགས་ཚུལ། དུས་ཆེན། མི་སྣ། པར་རིས་བར་འཁྱམས། ཟིན་ཐོ་འམ་དཔྱད་གཞི། དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཀར་ཆག། ད་དུང་གཟིགས། ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས་དྲྭ་མཐུད། ཧཱ་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག
__label__dz ༄༅། །སྔགས་དྲུག་ཕྱག་དྲུག་བཞུགས་སོ།། ༈ ཨོཾ་སྭ་བྷཱ་ཝ་ཤུདྡྷཿ སོགས་ནས། ཚོགས་རྫས་སམ་གཡང་རྫས་་་གླུད་རྫས་བདུད་རྫས་སོགས་་་རྣམས་ཤིན་ཏུ་དག་པར་གྱུར། ན་མཿསརྦ་ཏ་ཐཱ་ག་ཏ་བྷྱོ་བི་ཤྭ་མུ་ཁེ་བྷྱཿསརྦ་ཐཱ་ཁཾ་ཨུཏྒ་ཏེ་སྥ་ར་ཎ་ཨི་མཾ་ག་ག་ན་ཁཾ་སྭཱཧཱ། ལན་གསུམ། འཇིག་རྟེན་དང་འཇིག་རྟེན་ལས་འདས་པའི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་མི་ཟད་པ་འབྱུང་བ་ནམ་མཁའི་མཛོད་དུ་གྱུར། ཨོཾ་བཛྲ་ཨ་མྲྀ་ཏ་ཀུཎྜ་ལི་ཧ་ན་ཧ་ན་ཧཱུྃ་ཕཊ། ལན་གསུམ། ནམ་མཁའི་མཛོད་ལས་སོ་སོའི་ཐུགས་བཞེད་ཇི་ལྟ་བ་མོད་ལ་དབང་པོ་ལྔའི་བདུད་རྩི་དུག་ལྔའི་གསོས་སུ་གྱུར་པ་ཅི་ཡང་འབྱུང་བར་གྱུར། ན་མསརྦ་ཏ་ཐཱ་ག་ཏ་ཨ་ཝ་ལོ་ཀི་ཏེ། ཨོཾ་སམྦྷ་ར་སམྦྷ་ར་ཧཱུཾ། ལན་གསུམ། མགྲོན་རྣམས་རང་རང་གི་མདུན་དུ་ཚོགས་རྫས་སོགས་་་་ཅི་འདོད་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་གང་བར་གྱུར། ཨོཾ་ཛྙཱ་ན་ཨ་ཝ་ལོ་ཀི་ཏེ། ན་མཿས་མནྟ་སྥ་ར་ཎ་རསྨི་ཤམྦྷ་བ་ས་མ་ཡ། མ་ཧཱ་མ་ཎི། དུ་རུ་དུ་རུ། ཧྲི་ད་ཡ་ཛྭ་ལ་ནི་ཧཱུཾ། ལན་གསུམ། བདག་གི་ལུས་ཞིང་རྡུལ་གྱི་གྲངས་སུ་སོང་བས་ཡར་མཆོད་འོས། མར་སྙིང་རྗེའི་མགྲོན་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་ཕམ་རྒྱལ་མེད་པ་བློ་ཁ་རྫོགས་པ་ཕུལ་བར་གྱུར། ན་མས་མནྟ་བུདྡྷ་ནཱཾ་གྲ་ཧེ་ཤཱ་རི་པྲ་བྷཉྫ་ཏི་མ་ཧཱ་ས་མ་ཡ་སྭཱཧཱ། མགྲོན་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱིས་བདག་གི་སྡོང་གྲོགས་ཅི་དགོས་པ་བྱེད་པར་གྱུར། །ལན་གསུམ།
__label__dz རྒྱལ་གྱི་ཟླ་བའམ་ཧོར་ཟླ་བཅུ་གཉིས་པའི་ཚེས་གཅིག་ལུ་ ལོ་གསར་སྦེ་བརྩི་སྟེ་ངལ་གསོ་བཞགཔ་ཨིན། དེ་ཡང་ ཧོར་ཟླ་ ༡༢ པ་འདི་ སྤྱིར་འབྱུང་རྩིས་པའི་ལུགས་དཔྱིད་ཟླ་འབྲིང་པོ་ཡོས་ཀྱི་ཟླ་བ་ཨིན་རུང་ སྐབས་འདིར་ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ལུགས་ རྡོ་རྗེ་མཁའ་འགྲོའི་རྒྱུད་དང་ དགོངས་འདུས་ཀྱི་རྩིས་གཞུང་ནང་ལས་ དཔྱིད་ཟླ་ར་བ་སྟག་གི་ཟླ་བ་འདི་ ཧོར་ཟླ་བཅུ་གཉིས་པ་ལས་བརྩི་སྲོལ་ཡོདཔ་ལས་བརྟེན་ཏེ་ དཔྱིད་ཟླ་ར་བ་སྟག་གི་ཚེས་གཅིག་ལས་ ལོ་འགོ་ངོས་འཛིན་འབད༌དེ༌ བཅུ་གཉིས་པའི་ཚེས་གཅིག་ལུ་ལོ་གསར་ བརྩི་སྲོལ༌ཡོདཔ་ཨིན། ཟླཝ་བཅུ་གཉིས་པའི་ཚེས་གཅིག་ལུ་ ད་རེས་ནངས་པར་ ཤར་ཕྱོགས་པའི་ལོ་གསར་དང་ ཟླཝ་བཅུ་གཅིག་པའི་ཚེས་གཅིག་ལུ་ ཧཱ་དང་སྤ་རོ་པའི་ལོ་འབག་ཟེར་ སླབ་སྲོལ་ཡོདཔ་ཨིན་རུང་ ཟླ་བ་དང་པའི་ལོ་གསར་འདི་ དུས་རབས་ ༡༣ པའི་ནང་ ཧོར་སོག་གི་དབང་ཤུགས་ལས་བརྟེན་ཏེ་ བརྩི་སྲོལ་བྱུང་བ་མ་གཏོགས་ ལོ་གསར་ངོ་མ་འདི་ ཧོར་ཟླ་བཅུ་གཉིས་པ་དང་ཡང་ན་ ཧོར་ཟླ་བཅུ་གཅིག་པ་ལུ་ཕོགཔ་ཨིན་མས། དེ་ལས་བརྟེན་ཏེ་ ཟླ་ ༡༢ པའི་ཚེས་ ༡ གི་ཉི་མ་ཡང་གཞུང་གི་ངལ་གསོ་སྦེ་བཞག་དོ་ཡོདཔ་བཞིན་དུ་ དང་ཕུ་ང་བཅས་རའི་ཕམ་ཚུ་གིས་ཡང་ དུས་ཚོད་དེ་ལུ་ལོ་གསར་བརྩིས་ཏེ་ རྒྱལ་ས་སྤུངས་ཐང་ཁ་ལུ་ སྤྱི་བླ་ཚུ་གིས་འབུལ་བ་ཕུལ་ནིའི་དུས་ཚོད་དེ་ཁར་ཨིནམ་མ་ཚད་ ད་ལྟོ་ཡང་དགེ་འདུན་གྲྭ་ཚང་ནང་གི་ ཆོས་ཁྲིམས་པ་དང་གཉེར་ལས་འཛིན་ཚུ་ག་ར་ དེ་ཁ་ལས་གསར་རྙིང་སོར་མཚམས་ཨིནམ་ལས་ སྔར་སྲོལ་འབུལ་བའི་ལོ་གསར་ཟེར་ཆ་བཞག་སྟེ་ གཞུང་འབྲེལ་ངལ་གསོ་བཞགཔ་ཨིན།
__label__dz རང་གི་གསལ་བ་ལ་རྗེས་སུ་འགྲོ་བའི་ཆོས་དེ་སྤྱིའི་མཚན་ཉིད། མཚན་གཞི་ནི། ཤེས་བྱ་དང། དངོས་པོ་ལྟ་བུའོ། དཔེར་ན། ཤེས་བྱ་སྤྱི་ཡིན་ཏེ་རང་གི་གསལ་བ་སྟེ་རང་གི་བྱེ་བྲག་དངོས་པོ་དང་རྟག་པ་སོགས་ལ་རྗེས་སུ་འགྲོ་བའི་ཆོས་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། སྤྱི་ལ་སྒྲས་བརྗོད་རིགས་ཀྱི་སྒོ་ནས་དབྱེ་ན། ཚོགས་སྤྱི་རིགས་སྤྱི་དོན་སྤྱི་གསུམ་ཡོད། ཁྱབ་བྱེད་དུ་འཇུག་པའི་རང་གི་རིགས་ཡོད་པ་ཅན་གྱི་ཆོས་དེ་བྱེ་བྲག་གི་མཚན་ཉིད། མཚན་གཞི་ནི། ཤེས་པ་དང། ཀ་བུམ་གཉིས་ལ་སོགས་པ་ལྟ་བུའོ། དཔེར་ན། ཤེས་པ་བྱེ་བྲག་ཡིན་ཏེ། དངོས་པོ་དེ་ཤེས་པ་རང་གི་ཁྱབ་བྱེད་དུ་ཡོད་པའི་ཤེས་པ་རང་གི་རིགས་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། དངོས་པོ་དེ་ཤེས་པའི་ཁྱབ་བྱེད་ཡིན་ལ་ཤེས་པ་དེ་དངོས་པོའི་ཁྱབ་བྱ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། གཞན་ཡང་སྤྱི་བྱེ་བྲག་འགྲོ་ཚུལ་གྱི་རྟགས་གསུམ་བརྩི་ཚུལཡོད་པ་སོགས་གཞུང་དངོས་ལས་ཤེས་པར་བྱའོ། ༼དུང་དཀར་ཚིག་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ་༽ལས་བཏུས། དུང་དཀར་ཚིག་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ་
__label__dz <big> སྔོན་ བོད་ལས་རྗེ་བཙུན་མི་ལའི་སྐུ་གཅིག་ རྗེ་ངག་དབང་འབྲུག་པའི་གདན་ས་ འཚེམ་རྡོ་མགོན་པ་ཟེར་ ཞུ་སྲོལ་ཡོད་རུང་ དེང་སང་ཁ་སྐད་ཟུར་ཉམས་འདི་མཚམས་བྲག་མགོན་པ་ཟེར་ རྗེ་མི་ལ་འདི་ཁ་བཞུགས་ནི་སྦེ་ ཕྱི་རུ་དགུང་ཞག་ ད་ལྟོ་ཡོད་པའི་ རྡོབ་རྗི་རྫོང་ཡོད་སར་ལུས་སོང་ནུག དེ་ལས་དེའི་ནངས་པ་ ཉི་མའི་རྩེ་དང་མཉམ་ བཞུགས་སུ་གསོལ་ཟེར་ཞུ་པའི་ཚེ་ བཞུགས་མ་ཚུག་པ་ སྤོ་ནི་འབདཝ་ད་ རྗེ་བཙུན་གྱི་ཞལ་ལས་ ལུང་བསྟན་འདི་ནང་ཡོོོད་པའི་སྐོར་ གསུངས་ནུག ད་ལྟོ་བར་ནང་ཡང་ ཞལ་མཚམས་བྲག་མགོན་པ་ ཁ་ཐུག་ལུ་གཟིགས་ས་མཇལ་ནི་ཡོད། རྡོབ་རྗི་ཟེར་མི་འདི་ཡང་ ཁ་ཟུར་ཉམས་ཡར་སོངཔ་སྦེ་བཤད་ནི་འདུག ངོ་མ་སྦེ་ཅིན་ རྗེ་བཙུན་གྱི་རྡོག་པའམ་ ཞབས་རྡོ་གུ་བགྲད་འདི་ བཞུགས་ཡོད་པའི་རྒྱུ་མཚན་ལུ་རྟེན་ འདི་ཁའི་མཚན་ རྡོག་བགྲད་རྫོང་ཟེར་ ཞུཝ་ཨིན། རྡོག་ཟེར་མི་ ཞེ་སའི་ཐོག་ལས་ཞུ་བའི་བརྡ་དང་ གལ་སྲིད་མ་སྦྱར་བ་ཅིན་ ཆོས་སྐད་ནང་ལས་རྐངམ་ལུ་གོཝ་ཨིན། སྤ་རོ་རྫོང་ཁག
__label__dz ༄༅། །དཔལ་ལྡན་བླ་མ་དམ་པ་རྗེ་བཙུན་བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ་མཆོག་གི་ཞབས་བརྟན་བཞུགས་སོ།། ཨོཾ་སྭསྟི། རྒྱལ་བ་ཀུན་གྱི་མཁྱེན་བརྩེ་ནུས་པའི་འཕྲུལ། །དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པ་ངག་གི་དབང་པོ་ཡི། །རྒྱལ་ཚབ་བཀའ་དྲིན་གསུམ་ལྡན་འཁོར་ལོའི་མགོན། །རྗེ་བཙུན་བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ་ཞབས་བརྟན་གསོལ། །རྣམ་དག་ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས་གོ་ལའི་ལྡིང་ཁང་ན། །ཐོས་བསམ་སྒོམ་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན་ཆ་རྫོགས་ཟླ། །དམ་པའི་ངང་ཚུལ་བདུད་རྩིའི་འོད་དཀར་ཅན། །རྗེ་བཙུན་བསྟན་འཛིན་དོན་གྲུབ་ཞབས་བརྟན་གསོལ། །དེ་ལྟར་གསོལ་བཏབ་བསླུ་མེད་བདེན་པའི་མཐུས། །མགོན་ཁྱོད་བསྟན་དང་འགྲོ་བའི་སྤྱི་དཔལ་དུ། །ཞབས་ཟུང་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཁྲི་ལས་མི་གཡོ་བར། །བསྐལ་བརྒྱར་ཆོས་འཁོར་བསྐོར་བཞིན་བཞུགས་སུ་གསོལ། །ཅེས་པ་འདིའང་བདེ་ཆེན་ཕོ་བྲང་གི་སློབ་གྲྭ་བ་མགྲིན་གཅིག་ནས་གསོལ་བ་བཏབ་པ་དགེའོ།།
__label__dz འདི་ལ་ཉི་ཧོང་ཡང་ཟེར། དབྱིན་ཇིའི་སྐད་དུ་ Japan ཇ་པཱན ཁོར་ཡུག མགྲོན་ཁང་། ལོ་རྒྱུས། ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ། ཡུལ་ཚོ། མིང་ཐོགས་ཚུལ། དུས་ཆེན། མི་སྣ། པར་རིས་བར་འཁྱམས། ཟིན་ཐོ་འམ་དཔྱད་གཞི། དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཀར་ཆག། ད་དུང་གཟིགས། ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས་དྲ་མཐུད། ཇ་པཱན ཇཱ་པཱན
__label__dz ༉ ལྷོ་ལྗོངས་ཡངས་པའི་གླིང་ལ།། དམ་ཆོས་བསྟན་པ་དར་སོང་།། བླ་མའི་གདན་ས་ལ།། གཡུ་ཆུང་འབྲུ་དཀར་ལ།། བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྐྱིད་པའི་རྩེ་ནས།། བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཉི་མ་ཤར་སོང་།། བླ་མའི་གདན་ས་ལ།། གཡུ་ཆུང་འབྲུ་དཀར་ལ།། མི་དབང་འཇིགས་མེད་ཆོས་རྒྱལ།། སྐུ་ཚེ་ཡུན་དུ་གནས་སོང་།། བླ་མའི་གདན་ས་ལ།། གཡུ་ཆུང་འབྲུ་དཀར་ལ།། བུ་དང་བུ་མོའི་ཚོགས་རྣམས།། དགའ་བའི་བྲོ་གླུ་འཁྲབ་ཡོད།། བླ་མའི་གདན་ས་ལ།། གཡུ་ཆུང་འབྲུ་དཀར་ལ།། །།
__label__dz གསར་སྤང་རྫོང་ཁག ཁོར་ཡུག མགྲོན་ཁང་། ལོ་རྒྱུས། ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ། ཡུལ་ཚོ། མིང་ཐོགས་ཚུལ། དུས་ཆེན། མི་སྣ། པར་རིས་བར་འཁྱམས། ཟིན་ཐོ་འམ་དཔྱད་གཞི། དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཀར་ཆག། ད་དུང་གཟིགས། ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས་དྲྭ་མཐུད། གསར་སྤང་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་འཛུལ་སྒོ་ གསར་སྤང་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག
__label__dz ༉ འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་དགའ་བའི་ཞིང་ཁམས་ནང་།། མགོན་བླ་མེད་ཨོ་རྒྱན་པདྨ་བྱོན།། ཆོས་གསང་སྔགས་བསྟན་པ་ཕྱོགས་མཐར་སྤེལ།། དཔལ་ཟངས་མདོག་དཔལ་རིར་བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབས།། འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་སྦས་ཡུལ་སྐྱིད་པའི་ཞིང་།། ཕ་དྲིན་ཅན་ངག་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་བྱོན།། དཔལ་ཆོས་སྲིད་ལུགས་གཉིས་རྒྱལ་མཚན་བཙུགས།། རང་དབང་གི་རྒྱལ་དར་ཕྱོགས་བརྒྱར་བསྒྲེངས།། འབྲུག་མངའ་བདག་རྒྱལ་པོ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ།། སྐུ་འགྱུར་མེད་ཞབས་པད་བསྐལ་བརྒྱར་བརྟན།། མཐུན་ལམ་གྱི་དར་དཀར་བརྐྱང་བཞིན་དུ།། ཆབ་སྲིད་དང་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྟན་པ་སྤེལ།། འབྲུག་མི་སེར་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་ཁ་རྗེ་བཟང་།། བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཀྱི་དཔལ་འབྱོར་གོང་ལས་འཕེལ།། ལྷག་བསམ་གྱི་མེ་ཏོག་འདབ་བརྒྱ་བཞད།། དཔལ་འབྲུག་པ་དར་ཞིང་རྒྱས་པར་ཤོག། །།
__label__dz ༄༅། །ཆང་མཆོད་བཞུགས་སོ།། ༄༅། །ཨོཾ་ཨཱཿཧཱུྃ། ལན་གསུམ་གྱིས་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས། མཆོད་དོ་ཕུད་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་མངའ་བདག །རིགས་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་དབང་ཕྱུག །དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་གཙོ་བོ། །དུས་གསུམ་སངས་རྒྱས་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་སྐུ་གསུང་ཐུགས་གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་ངོ་བོ་རྩ་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱི་རྗེ་བཙུན་དཔལ་ལྡན་བླ་མ་དམ་པ་མ་ལུས་ཤིང་ལུས་པ་མེད་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཞལ་དུ་པཉྩ་ཨ་མྲྀ་ཏ་པཱ་ཛ་ཁཱ་ཧི། བྱ་བའི་རྒྱུད། སྤྱོད་པའི་རྒྱུད། རྣལ་འབྱོར་རྒྱུད། རྣལ་འབྱོར་བླ་ན་མེད་པའི་རྒྱུད་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི་ཡི་དམ་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གྱི་ལྷ་ཚོགས་མ་ལུས་ཤིང་ལུས་པ་མེད་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཞལ་དུ་པཉྩ་ཨ་མྲྀ་ཏ་པཱུ་ཛ་ཁཱ་ཧི། གནས་གསུམ་གྱི་དཔའ་བོ་དང་མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ་རྣམས་དང་། དུར་ཁྲོད་ཆེན་པོ་བརྒྱད་ན་གནས་པའི་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང་དང་ཞིང་སྐྱོང་གི་མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ་མ་ལུས་ཤིང་ལུས་པ་མེད་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཞལ་དུ་པཉྩ་ཨ་མྲྀ་ཏ་པཱུ་ཛ་ཁཱ་ཧི། དཔལ་མཱ་ཧཱ་ཀཱ་ལ་ཁྲག་འཐུང་གི་རྒྱལ་པོ། རྣལ་འབྱོར་གྱི་དགྲ་ལྷ། དུག་གསུམ་གྱི་སྨན་པ། གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་དང་དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་གྱི་སྲུང་མ་ཆེན་པོ་བྱ་རོག་མིང་ཅན་འཁོར་བཀའ་སྡོད་དང་བཅས་པ་ལ་སོགས་པ་དམ་པ་ཆོས་སྐྱོང་བ་མ་ལུས་ཤིང་ལུས་པ་མེད་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཞལ་དུ་པཉྩ་ཨ་མྲྀ་ཏ་པཱུ་ཛ་ཁཱ་ཧི། གཞན་ཡང་ཡུལ་ཕྱོགས་འདི་ཉིད་ན་གནས་པ་ལ་སོགས་ལྷ་མ་སྲིན་སྡེ་བརྒྱད། འགྲོ་བ་རིགས་དྲུག །སྐྱེ་གནས་རྣམ་པ་བཞིས་བསྡུས་པའི་སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་ཞལ་དུ་པཉྩ་ཨ་མྲྀ་ཏ་པཱུ་ཛ་ཁཱ་ཧི། ཀུན་མཁྱེན་པད་དཀར་གྱིས་མཛད་པའོ།། །།
__label__dz ༉ ལ་འདི་བཀྲིས་ལ་མོའི་ལ་གཞོལ་ན།། ཤིང་ལ་འཁྲུངས་པ་ཨ་རུ་བ་རུ་འཁྲུངས།། འདི་ལ་འཁོར་བ་གསེར་བྱ་ཟུང་གཅིག་འཁོར།། གསེར་བྱ་རང་ཡང་མི་སྡོད་འཕུར་འགྲོ་གེ། ཡར་ཡར་ཆོས་འཁོར་ལྷ་སར་འཕུར་འགྲོ་གེ།། བླ་མ་ཤཱ་ཀྱ་མུ་ཎེ་ཞབས་སར་འཕུར།། ཡབ་ཆེན་ཨ་པའི་ལས་སྒྲིབ་འདི་གིས་དག། གསེར་བྱ་རང་གི་བསམ་པ་འདི་གིས་རྫོགས།། ལ་འདི་ཚེ་རིང་ལ་མོའི་ལ་གཞོལ་ན།། ཤིང་ལ་འཁྲུངས་པ་བ་ལུ་སུ་ལུ་འཁྲུངས།། འདི་ལ་འཁོར་བ་དངུལ་བྱ་ཟུང་གཅིག་འཁོར།། དངུལ་བྱ་རང་ཡང་མི་སྡོད་འཕུར་འགྲོ་གེ།། ཡར་ཡར་ལྷོ་བྲག་མཁར་ཆུར་འཕུར་འགྲོ་གེ།། བླ་མ་ནམ་མཁའི་སྙིང་པོའི་ཞབས་སར་འཕུར།། ཡུམ་ཆེན་ཨ་མའི་ལས་སྒྲིབ་འདི་གིས་དག། དངུལ་བྱ་རང་གི་བསམ་པ་འདི་གིས་རྫོགས།། ལ་འདི་རྡོ་སྐྱོང་ལ་མོའི་ལ་གཞོལ་ན།། ཤིང་ལ་འཁྲུངས་པ་ལྷ་ཤིང་ཤུགས་པོ་འཁྲུངས།། འདི་ལ་འཁོར་བ་ཁུ་བྱུག་ཟུང་གཅིག་འཁོར།། ཁུ་བྱུག་རང་ཡང་མི་སྡོད་འཕུར་འགྲོ་གེ།། ཕར་ཕར་སྤུངས་ཐང་བདེ་ཆེན་འཕུར་འགྲོ་གེ།། བླ་མ་ངག་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཞབས་སར་འཕུར།། མཉམ་རོགས་གཞོན་པའི་ལས་སྒྲིབ་འདི་གིས་དག། ཁུ་བྱུག་རང་གི་བསམ་པ་འདི་གིས་རྫོགས།། །།
__label__dz ༉ ཚེས་ཆེན་བཅོ་ལྔའི་ཟླ་བ།། ཤར་རིའི་རྩེ་ནས་ཤར་སོང་།། ཤར་རིའི་རྩེ་ནས་ཤར་ནས།། འགྲོ་བའི་མུན་པ་སེལ་སོང་།། འགྲོ་བའི་མུན་པ་སེལ་ནས།། དགའ་བ་སྐྱིད་པ་འདུག་གོ། དགའ་སྐྱིད་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པའི།། རྟེན་འབྲེལ་འདི་ལ་བཟང་སོང་།། གསེར་གླིང་གྲུ་བཞིའི་ནང་ལས།། གསེར་གྱི་མེ་ཏོག་ཤར་སོང་།། གསེར་གྱི་མེ་ཏོག་ཤར་ནས།། ཕུལ་ས་བླ་མའི་ཕྱག་ལ།། བླ་མའི་ཕྱག་ལ་ཕུལ་ནས།། ཆོས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ་དར་སོང་།། དངུལ་གླིང་གྲུ་བཞི་ནང་ལས།། དངུལ་གྱི་མེ་ཏོག་ཤར་སོང་།། དངུལ་གྱི་མེ་ཏོག་ཤར་ནས།། ཕུལ་ས་རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཕྱག་ལ།། རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཕྱག་ལ་ཕུལ་ནས།། རྒྱལ་སྲིད་བསྟན་པ་དར་སོང་།། དུང་གླིང་གྲུ་བཞིའི་ནང་ལས།། དུང་གི་མེ་ཏོག་ཤར་སོང་།། དུང་གི་མེ་ཏོག་ཤར་ནས།། ཕུལ་ས་ཡབ་ཡུམ་ཕྱག་ལ།། ཡབ་ཡུམ་ཕྱག་ལ་ཕུལ་ནས།། བྱམས་བརྩེ་སྔར་ལས་རྒྱས་སོང་།། ཕ་རིའི་སྤང་གི་ལོག་ལ།།ཧ་ལོའི་མེ་ཏོག་ཤར་སོང་།། ཧ་ལོའི་མེ་ཏོག་ཤར་ནས།། ཕུལ་ས་དགའ་བའི་ཕྱག་ལ།། དགའ་བའི་ཕྱག་ལ་ཕུལ་ནས།། དམ་ཚིག་སྔར་ལས་བརྟན་སོང་།། །།
__label__dz བོ་ཡིག་ག། །མ་རྫོང ཉི་ཤ་རྩ་ལྔ། ཉི་ཤ་རྩ་དྲུག ཉི་ཤ་རྩ་བདུན། ཉི་ཤ་རྩ་བརྒྱ ཁྱོད་རྒྱུད་ང་ཡིས་བྱིན་གྱིས་རླབས་པ་ཡིན། །ཞག་ནི་དྲུག་ཅུ་རྩ་བདུན་ ལོན་པའི་དུས། །. གཉིད་ཞབས་དག་ཏུ་ཁྱོད་ལ་ཆོས ལོ་རིམ་བདུན་པའི་སྨད་ཆ།. ༡ སུམ་ཅུ་བའི་རྩ་བ་དང་ལེགས་བཤད་ལྗོན་དབང་ བློར་ངེས་པའི་རྨང་. དུང་དཀར་ཚིག་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ་
__label__dz འཇིགས་མེད་གེ་སར་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་ཕྱུག ༼ ༡༩༨༠༽ མི་དབང་འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་ལྔ་པ་ དཔལ་འཇིགས་མེད་གེ་སར་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་ཕྱུག་མཆོག་ སྤྱི་ལོ་ ༡༩༨༠ དབྱིན་ཟླ་གཉིས་པའི་དབྱིན་ཚེས་ ༢༡ ལུ་ ཡབ་འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་བཞི་པ་ དཔལ་འཇིགས་མེད་སེང་གེ་དབང་ཕྱུག་མཆོག་དང་ རྒྱལ་ཡུམ་ཨ་ཞེ་ ཚེ་རིང་དབྱངས་སྒྲོན་དབང་ཕྱུག་མཆོག་གཉིས་ཀྱི་སྲས་ལུ་ སྐུ་འཁྲུངས་ནུག། མི་དབང་མཆོག་ལུ་ སྐུ་སྤུན་ཆུང་ཤོས་གཉིས་ཡོདཔ་དང་ དེ་ཡང་ རྒྱལ་ཚབ་འཇིགས་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེ་དབང་ཕྱུག་མཆོག་དང་ སྲས་མོ་བདེ་ཆེན་དབྱངས་འཛོམས་དབང་ཕྱུག་མཆོག་གཉིས་ཨིན། མི་དབང་མཆོག་ལུ་སྐུ་སྤུན་གཞན་ཡང་ཡོདཔ་དང་ དེ་ཡང་རྒྱལ་སྲས་གསུམ་དང་ སྲས་མོ་བཞི་ཡོདཔ་ཨིན། མི་དབང་མཆོག་གིས་འབྲིང་རིམ་སློབ་གྲྭ་གོང་མ་འདི་ དབྱངས་ཅན་ཕུག་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེ་བ་ནང་གཟིགས་ནུག། དེའི་ཤུལ་ལས་ བྱང་ཨ་མི་རི་ཀའི་ ཨཱན་ཌོ་བར་ལུ་ཡོད་པའི་ ཕི་ལིཔ་ཨེ་ཀ་ཌེ་མི་དང་ ཨེཤ་བཱན་ཧེམ་ལུ་ཡོད་པའི་ཀུ་ཤིང་ཨེ་ཀ་ཌེ་མི་ལས་སློབ་གྲྭ་ཆེ་བ་གཟིགས་ཚར་ཏེ་ མ་ས་ཅུ་སེཊ་ལུ་ཡོད་པའི་ ཝི་ཊོན་ཀོ་ལེཇ་དང་ ཨོཀསི་ཕོཊ་ལུ་ཡོད་པའི་མཱག་ད་ལེན་མཐོ་རིམ་སློབ་གྲྭ་ནང་གཟིགས་ནུག། Reference https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jigme_Khesar_Namgyel_Wangchuck རྗེ་བརྩུན་པདྨ སྐུ་འཁོར་གྱི་བརྒྱུད་པ། མི་མང་ : འབྲུག་མི
__label__dz བསམ་གྲུབ་ལྗོངས་མཁར་ གྲོང་􀮣 བསམ་གྲུབ་ལྗོངས་མཁར་རྫོང་ཁག ཁོར་ཡུག མགྲོན་ཁང་། ལོ་རྒྱུས། ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ། ཡུལ་ཚོ། མིང་ཐོགས་ཚུལ། དུས་ཆེན། མི་སྣ། པར་རིས་བར་འཁྱམས། ཟིན་ཐོ་འམ་དཔྱད་གཞི། དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཀར་ཆག། ད་དུང་གཟིགས། ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས་དྲ་མཐུད། གྲོང་􀮣 འབྲུག་ཡུལ་
__label__dz དང་པ་ར་ བྱ་རྒྱུ་ཟེར་མི་འདི་ རྫས་སྦྱོར་ཉུང་སུ་སྦེ་བླུགས་ཏེ་ ཁུ་བ་མངམ་ཡོད་མིའི་ཚོདམ་གྱི་རིགས་ལུ་སླབ་ཨིན། འདི་ཡང་ བཞེས་སྒོ་དང་ཚོདམ་ལྷམ་པ་མ་འདྲཝ་ཚུ་གི་བར་ན་ ཟུར་ཐེབས་ཀྱི་ཚོདམ་བཟུམ་ཅིག་ཨིནམ་སྦེ་ ཆ་བཞག་ནི་ཡོདཔ་ཨིན་མས། རྫས་སྦྱོར་ཚང་དགོཔ། ཧོན་ཚོད་/ལོམ། དར་ཚི། བླམ་བན་ད། ཨོམ། མར། ས་སྒ་དང་ སྐྱ་སྒོགཔ། ཨེ་ཕྱེ་ཚུ་ཚང་དགོ། བཟོ་ཐངས། ཧེ་མ་ར་ ཧོན་ཚོད་/ལོམ་འདི་ ཆུ་འཁྱུ་སྦེ་གཏུབ་དགོ། གཏུབ་ཚར་ཞིནམ་ལས་ ཀ་ལ་རྫམ་ནང་ལུ་བླུགས་ཏེ་ འདི་གུ་ལུ་ ཆུ། མར་ཁུ། ཚྭ། ས་སྒ་དང་ཨེ་ཕྱེ་ཚུ་བླུག་དགོ། དེ་ལས་ བཟའ་མི་རང་སོའི་དགའ་ཧིང་དང་བསྟུན་ཏེ་ ཨོམ་བླུག་རུང་བཏུབ་ཨིན། འདི་གུར་ དར་ཚི་དཀྲུམས་ཏེ་བླུགས་ཞིནམ་ལས་ རྫས་སྦྱོར་གཞན་དང་གཅིག་ཁར་སླ་བསྲེ་དགོ། དེ་གི་ཤུལ་ལས་ར་ ཚྭ་གི་བྲོཝ་བལྟ་སྟེ་ བཏུབ་པ་ཅིན་ཐབ་གུ་ལས་མར་ཕབ་ཞིནམ་ལས་ བྱ་རྒྱུ་འདི་ཟ་ཆོགཔ་སྦེ་འགྱོཝ་ཨིན། དམིགས་བསལ་ཁྱད་ཆོས། བྱ་རྒྱུ་འདི་ ཁུ་བ་མེད་པའི་ཚོདམ་བཟོ་ཡོད་པའི་སྐབས་བཟོཝ་ཨིན། ཨིན་རུང་ ད་རེས་ནངས་པ་ ཕྱི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ལས་ནང་འདྲེན་འབད་མི་ དཱལ་ཟེར་མི་སྲནམ་ཅུང་ཆུང་ཀུའི་རིགས་ཅིག་ཨིན་མི་དེ་གིས་ བྱ་རྒྱུ་སྦེ་བཟོ་སྟེ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་མི་མང་སུ་འཐོནམ་ལས་བརྟེན་ ང་བཅས་རའི་སྔོན་ལས་བཟ་སྲོལ་ཡོད་མི་ ཧོན་ཚོད་དང་སྐྱུ་རུ་ལ་སོགས་པ་ཚུ་གིས་བྱ་རྒྱུ་བཟོ་སྟེ་ ལོངས་སྤྱོད་མི་འདི་ཚད་ཅིག་ལས་མེདཔ་ཨིན་མས། རྒྱབ་རྟེན། https://worldfood.guide/dish/jaju/ བཟའ་འཐུང་། བཞེས་སྒོ་འབད་ཐངས།
__label__dz ༉ སྐལ་བ་བཟང་པོ་གཅིག་དང་བཟང་པོ་གཉིས།། སྐལ་བ་བཟང་པོ་འཕྲལ་ཡུན་བདེ་བའི་ལམ།། ཕྱི་ནང་ཡོན་ཏན་འཛོམས་པ་སེམས་རེ་དགའ།། སེམས་ལ་དགའ་བའི་གླུ་གར་ལྷ་ལུ་ཕུལ།། སེམས་ལ་དགའ་བ་གཅིག་དང་སྐྱིད་པོ་གཉིས།། སེམས་ལ་དགའ་བ་དྲིན་ཅན་སློབ་དཔོན་ཚོགས།། ཕ་མ་གཉིས་ལས་ལྷག་པའི་སེམས་རེ་དགའ།། སེམས་ལ་དགའ་བའི་གླུ་གར་ལྷ་ལུ་ཕུལ།། ཉམས་ལ་དགའ་བ་གཅིག་དང་སྐྱིད་པོ་གཉིས།། ཉམས་ལ་དགའ་བ་རྩ་གསུམ་ལྷ་ཡི་མཐུས།། འགལ་རྐྱེན་བར་ཆད་མེད་པར་ཉམས་རེ་དགའ།། ཉམས་ལ་དགའ་བའི་གླུ་གར་ལྷ་ལུ་ཕུལ།། གཙུག་གི་རྒྱན་དུ་མི་བསྟེན་རྒྱན་དུ་བསྟེན།། གཙུག་གི་རྒྱན་མཆོག་མངའ་བདག་རིན་པོ་ཆེ།། སྐུ་ཚེ་ཞབས་པད་བརྟན་པ་སེམས་རེ་དགའ།། སེམས་ལ་དགའ་བའི་གླུ་གར་ལྷ་ལུ་ཕུལ།། །།
__label__dz ལྷུན་རྩེ་རྫོང་ཁག ལུ། འབྲུག་ཡུལ་ ཁོར་ཡུག མགྲོན་ཁང་། ལོ་རྒྱུས། ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ། ཡུལ་ཚོ། མིང་ཐོགས་ཚུལ། དུས་ཆེན། མི་སྣ། པར་རིས་བར་འཁྱམས། ཟིན་ཐོ་འམ་དཔྱད་གཞི། དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཀར་ཆག། ད་དུང་གཟིགས། །http:www.lhuentse.gov.bt ལྷུན་རྩེ་] http:www.bhutan.gov.btgovernmentdzongkhagsphpdzid=24 google
__label__dz ༄༅། །དར་གྱི་སྨོན་འདེབས་བཞུགས་སོ། ༈ ཧོ༔ བསྟན་པའི་ལྷ་དང་འབྲུག་པའི་བསྲུང་མ་ཆོས་སྐྱོང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི་སྤྱན་དང་ལྡན་པ་རྣམས་ལྷ་བརྟན་དར་དཀར་ཀྱི་རྟེན་འདི་ལ་བརྟན་པར་བཞུགས་ཤིང་བརྟན་པར་བཞུགས་ནས་ཀྱང་། སྤྱིར་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བསྟན་པ་དར་བ། སེམས་ཅན་ལ་བདེ་སྐྱིད་འབྱུང་བ། ཁྱད་པར་དུ་རྒྱུ་འབྱོར་བ་སྦྱིན་པའི་བདག་པོ་མི་ནོར་འཁོར་དང་བཅས་པ་རྣམས་ལུས་ལ་ན་ཚ། སེམས་ཀྱི་སྡུག་བསྔལ། ཆག་ཆེ་ཉམས་ང་སོགས་མི་མཐུན་པའི་ཚོགས་ཐམས་ཅད་ཞི་བ་དང་།མཐུན་རྐྱེན་ཚེ་དང་བསོད་ནམས་དཔལ་དང་འབྱོར་པའི་ལེགས་ཚོགས་རྒྱས་པ་དང་། མི་ནོར་ཟས་གསུམ་ཐམས་ཅད་དབང་དུ་བསྡུས་པ་དང་། ཕ་རོལ་དགྲ་དང་བགེགས་ཀྱི་འཚེ་བ་བཟློག་པ་དང་། བསྟན་འགྲོ་བདེ་ཞིང་དཔལ་ལ་རང་དབང་དུ་གྱུར་ནས་ལོ་ཕྱུགས་རྟག་ཏུ་ལེགས་ཆར་ཆུ་དུས་སུ་འབབ་བདེ་སྐྱིད་འབྱོར་ལྡན་གྱི་དཔལ་ལ་ལོངས་སུ་སྤྱོད་ནས་མཐོ་རི་དང་ཐར་པའི་ལམ་སྣ་ཟིན་པའི་གྲོགས་དང་དཔུང་གཉེན་དམ་པ་གཡེལ་བ་མེད་པར་མཛད་དུ་གསོལ།།
__label__dz སྤུ་ན་ཁ་རྫོང་གི་སྐོར་ལས་མདོར་བསྡུས་ཅིག་བྲིས་ནི་ཨིན། ཞབས་དྲུང་གི་དགུང་ལོ་༢༣་ བཞེས་པའི་མེ་འབྲུག་ལུ་འོབས་མཚོ་པའི་དཔུང་གིས་བསུས་ཏེ་ཡུལ་ལ་དགེ་བ་དང་ལྡན་པ་ཁ་བཞི་ལྷོའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཙནྡན་ནགས་མོའི་ལྗོངས་ལུ་བྱོན་ནུག། ཞབས་དྲུང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་མཆོག་གི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་དབང་དུ་བསྡུ་བ་གྱི་མ་ཚད་ སྤུ་ན་ཁ་རྫོང་སྤྱི་ལོ་༡༦༣༧ ལུ་གསར་བཞེངགནང་ནུག། དེ་གི་སྐབས་རྫོང་བཞེང་མི་དེ་ཡང་སྤུ་ན་ཁ་བ་ལིང་ལས་ཨིན་མི་བཟོཝ་བ་ལིང་པ་ཟེར་མི་འདི་ཨིན་མས།ཞབས་དྲུང་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་མཆོག་གི་བཀའ་གནང་པ་ལྟར་དུ་དགེ་འདུན་པའི་གསོལ་བཏབ་ཡང་སྤུ་ན་ཁ་ལུ་བྱོན་ནི་ཡོདཔ་འབད་བཟོ་གནང་ནུག ཤུལ་ལས་རྫོང་བཞེང་ཚར་འབད་སྤྱི་ལོ་༡༦༥༡ གྱི་ལོ་ལུ་སྐུ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབྱིངས་ལུ་ཐིམ་སོ་ནུག རྫོང་གི་མིང་ཡང་སྤུ་ཐངས་བདེ་བ་ཆེན་པོའི་ཕོ་བྲང་ཟེར་བཏགས་གནང་ནུག རྫོང་འདི་ཕོ་ཆུ་དང་མོ་ཆུ་གཉིས་ཀྱི་བར་ན་ཆགས་འདི་ཡོདཔ་ཨིན། སྤུ་ན་ཁའི་ཚེས་བཅུ་འདི་ཟླཝ་དང་པའི་ནང་གནང་ཚུལ་ཡོདཔ་ཨིན། གྲོང་􀮣 འབྲུག་ཡུལ་ སྤུ་ན་ཁ་རྫོང་ཁག
__label__dz ཆུ་ཁ་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་ཡུལ་ ཁོར་ཡུག མགྲོན་ཁང་། ལོ་རྒྱུས། ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ། ཡུལ་ཚོ། མིང་ཐོགས་ཚུལ། དུས་ཆེན། མི་སྣ། པར་རིས་བར་འཁྱམས། ཟིན་ཐོ་འམ་དཔྱད་གཞི། དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཀར་ཆག། ད་དུང་གཟིགས། ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས་དྲ་མཐུད། འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག
__label__dz དངུལ་ཀྲམ་འདི་འབྲུག་གི་ཤོག་དངུལ་གྱི་མིང.ཨིན། དངུལ་ཀྲམ་༡་གི་ཕྱེད་ཏམ་༡༠༠་ཅི་ཨིན།འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་གཞུང་དངུལ་ལས་དབང་འཛིན་གྱི་ཐ་ལ་དང་དངུལ་ཀྲམ་ཛོ་ཀྲུན་ཚུ་བདག་འཛིན་སྦེཝ་ཨིན། འབྲུག་གི་དངུལ་ཀྲམ་འདི་རྒྱ་གར་གི་རུ་པི་དང་དངུལ་ཤུག་འདྲན་འདྲ་ཡོདཔ་ཨིན། Articles containing Dzongkha-language text Articles containing Dzongkha-language text
__label__dz ༢༠༡༡ (2011) དབུ་ཁྲིད་ཀྱི་གོ་འཕང༌། མི་དབང་རྒྱལཔོ། : འཇིགས་མེད་ཁེ་སར་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་ཕྱུག སྲིད་བློན། : བྱ་སྒོ། སྐྱེ་ནི། འཆི་བ། ཁ་སྐོང༌། ༢༠༠༡ ༢༠༠༢ ༢༠༠༣ ༢༠༠༤ ༢༠༠༥ ༢༠༠༦ ༢༠༠༧ ༢༠༠༨ ༢༠༠༩ ༢༠༡༠ ༢༠༡༡ ༢༠༡༢ ༢༠༡༣ ༢༠༡༤ ༢༠༡༥ ༢༠༡༦ ༢༠༡༧ ༢༠༡༨ ༢༠༡༩ ༢༠༢༠ ༢༠༢༡ ལོ་གྲངས
__label__dz ༈ རྒྱལ་པོའི་བརྟན་བཞུགས། ༈ འབྲུག་ཙན་དན་བཀོད་པའི་བཀོད་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ན། །དཔལ་ལུགས་གཉིས་བསྟན་སྲིད་སྐྱོང་བའི་མགོན། །འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་པོ་མངའ་བདག་རིན་པོ་ཆེ། སྐུ་འགྱུར་མེད་བརྟན་ཅིང་ཆབ་སྲིད་འཕེལ། །ཆོས་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྟན་པ་དར་ཞིང་རྒྱས། །འབངས་བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཉི་མ་ཤར་བར་ཤོག །།
__label__dz ༉ ནམ་མཁའ་གཡུ་ཡི་ཕོ་བྲང་།། དཀར་པོ་སྤྲིན་གྱིས་མ་སྒྲིབ།། མགྲོན་པོ་གསེར་གྱི་ཉི་མས།། གླིང་བཞི་བསྐོར་ནས་ཤར་ཡོང་།། ལྷ་ཤིང་ཙན་དན་སྡོང་པོ།། བསེར་པོ་རླུང་གིས་མ་བསྐྱོད།། སྐད་སྙན་ལྷ་བྱ་ཁུ་བྱུག། ནགས་ཚལ་འགྲིམ་ནས་བབས་འོང་།། མཛེས་སྡུག་པདྨའི་བཞིན་རས།། སད་དང་སེར་བས་མ་བཅོམ།། ཡིད་འོང་གསེར་སྦྲང་བུང་བ།། སྐྱེད་ཚལ་འགྲིམ་ནས་འབབ་འོང་།། བླ་མ་དུས་གསུམ་སངས་རྒྱས།། སྤྱི་བོའི་གཙུག་ཏུ་བསྒོམ་ནས།། བྱིན་རླབས་ཐུགས་རྗེའི་ཉི་མ།། ང་ཚོའི་སྙིང་ལ་ཤར་སོང་།། ཡར་ལ་གསོལ་བ་བཏབ་པས།། མར་ལ་དངོས་གྲུབ་གནང་བྱུང་།། །།
__label__dz དྷར་མ་སེང་གེ་སངས་རྒྱས་དབོན་རས (1177-1237) འབྲུག་པ་གཞོན་ནུ་སེང་གེ (1200-1266) འབྲུག་པ་ཉི་མ་སེང་གེ (1251-1287) འབྲུག་པ་སེང་གེ་ཤེས་རབ (1238-1287) འབྲུག་པ་སེང་གེ་རིན་ཆེན (1258-1313) aka (སྤོས་སྐྱ་པ) འབྲུག་པ་སེང་གེ་རྒྱལ་པོ (1289-1326) འབྲུག་པ་ཀུན་དགའ་སེང་གེ (1314-1347) འབྲུག་པ་བློ་གྲོས་སེང་གེ (1345-1390) འབྲུག་པ་ཤེས་རབ་སེང་གེ (1371-1392) མི་མང་
__label__dz ཀོ་བིཊ་༡༩(COVID-19) འབྲུག་ཡུལ་ཀོ་ཝིཊ་༡༩ གི་བརྡ་དོན། ༨༥༩འཐོབ་མི། ༡༧ཡོད་མི། ༨༤༡དྲག་མི། ༡ཤི་རྐྱེན། བཀག་ཐབས། འཕྲལ་འཕྲལ་ར་ལགཔ་འཁྱུ། ཁ་རས་རྐྱབ། བར་ན་ས་སྟོང་བཞག། འཚོ་སྐྱོང་ལེགས་ཤོམ། ཁྱིམ་ནང་སྡོད། ཀོ་ཝིཌ་-༡༩ གི་ནད་རྟགས། གློ་འཁོག་ནི། དྲོད་འབར་རྐྱབ་ནི། འུ་སྡུག་ནི། བྱོ་ལྷ་དང་དྲིམ་མི་ཚོར་ནི། མགུ་ཏོ་ན་ནི། ལྐོདམ་ན་ནི། ཁ་ལས་བསྐྱུག་ནི། དབུགས་མགྱོགས་པར་ལེན་ནི།
__label__dz སྲིད་བློན འབྲུག་ཡུལ་ བློན་པོ་ འཇིགས་མེད་འོད་ཟེར་ཕྲིན་ལས། (20 July 1998 - 9 July 1999) བློན་པོ་ ཀུན་བཟང་རྡོ་རྗེ། (9 July 1999 - 20 July 2000) བློན་པོ་ མཁའ་འགྲོ་དབང་ཕྱུག (20 July 2000 - 8 August 2001) བློན་པོ་ སངྱས་དངོས་གྲུབ། (8 August 2001 - 14 August 2002) བློན་པོ་ ཕྲིན་ལས་རྒྱ་མཚོ། (14 August 2002 - 30 August 2003) བློན་པོ་ འཇིགས་མེད་འོད་ཟེར་ཕྲིན་ལས། (30 August 2003 - 18 August 2004) བློན་པོ་ མཁའ་འགྲོ་དབང་ཕྱུག (18 August 2004 - 5 September 2005) བློན་པོ་ ཀུན་བཟང་རྡོ་རྗེ། (5 September 2005 - 7 September 2006) བློན་པོ་ སངྱས་དངོས་གྲུབ། (7 September 2006 - 31 July 2007) བློན་པོ་ ཕྲིན་ལས་རྒྱ་མཚོ། (31 July 2007 - 9 April 2008) བློན་པོ་ འཇིགས་མེད་འོད་ཟེར་ཕྲིན་ལས། (9 April 2008 - ...) འབྲུག་གི་སྲིད་དོན་ལམ་ལུགས།ི
__label__dz (རྒ་ལོ་ཙྰ་བ་གཞོན་ནུ་དཔལ)གུང་ཐང་བླ་མ་ཞང་དང་དུས་མཉམ་པ་ཁོང་གི་རྣམ་ཐར་ལས་བཤད། འཁྲུངས་ཡུལ་ཁམས་ལྡན་མ་ནས་ཡིན། ལོ་རྒྱུས་རྒྱས་ན་ཇོ་ནང་ཏྰ་ར་ནྰ་ཐས་མཛད་པའི་《འཇམ་དཔལ་གཤིན་རྗེ་གཤེད་ཀྱི་ཆོས་འབྱུང་》དང། 《ཆོས་འབྱུང་མཁས་པའི་དགའ་སྟོན་》ལེ་ཚན་【ཏ】པའི་ཤོག་གྲངས་༡༢པར་གསལ། ། ༼དུང་དཀར་ཚིག་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ་༽ལས་བཏུས། དུང་དཀར་ཚིག་མཛོད་ཆེན་མོ་
__label__dz ༉ འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་ས་གནས་ བྱང་ཤར་ཁ་ཐུག་ལུ་ ས་གཞི་རྒྱ་ཚད་ ཀི་ལོ་མི་ཊར་གྲུ་བཞི་ ༡༥༢༠.༦༡ འབད་མི་ འབུམ་སྡེ་གླིང་རི་དྭགས་ས་ཁོངས་འདི་ རྒྱ་མཚོའི་མཐའ་མ་ལས་ མཐོ་ཚད་མི་ཊར་ ༡༥༠༠ ལས་ ༦༠༠༠ ཚུན་གྱི་ས་ཁར་ཆགས་ཏེ་ཡོད། ས་ཁོངས་འདི་གིས་ འབུམ་སྡེ་གླིང་རྒེད་འོག་རྩིས་པའི་བཀྲ་ཤིས་གཡང་རྩེ་རྫོང་ཁག་གི་ས་གནས་མང་ཤོས་ཅིག་ཁྱབ་སྟེ་ཡོདཔ་ཨིན། ས་ཁོངས་དེ་ སྤྱི་ལོ་ ༡༩༩༥ ལུ་འཅར་གཞི་བརྩམས་ཡོདཔ་ད་ སྤྱི་ལོ་ ༡༩༩༨ ལུ་གཞི་བཙུགས་འབད་ནུག། འདི་ནང་ སྔོ་ཤིང་དང་སྲོག་ཆགས་ཀྱི་རིགས་ལེ་ཤ་ཅིག་ཡོདཔ་ད་ མཚོ་དང་འབུམ་གླིང་གི་ལུང་གཤོང་ལ་སོགས་པའི་མཐོང་སྣང་མཇའ་ཆི་ཆི་སྦེ་མཐོན་ནི་ཡོདཔ་ཨིན། ས་ཁོངས་འདི་ནང་ ཆོས་དང་ལམ་སྲོལ་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི་་ས་གནས་མ་འདྲཝ་ལེ་ཤ་ཅི་ར་ཡོད། ས་ཁོངས་འདི་ འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ནང་ ཆུ་ཆེན་སྦོམ་ཤོས་ཅིག་ཨིན་མི་ གྲངས་མེད་ཆུ་དང་མཁོ་ལོང་ཆུའི་འགྲམ་ལུ་ཆགས་ཏེ་ཡོདཔ་ད་ ས་ཁོངས་འདི་ གལ་གནད་ཅན་གྱི་བྱ་རིགས་ས་ཁོངས་སྦེ་ངོས་འཛིན་འབད་དེ་ཡོད། ཁུངས་གཏུག། Wikipedia contributors. (2021). Bumdeling Wildlife Sanctuary. In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bumdeling_Wildlife_Sanctuary&oldid=1012220049
__label__dz ༉ དགའ་སྐྱིད་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པའི་འབྲུག་གི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ།། མི་ནོར་ཟས་ཀྱི་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་ཡོད།། མ་བཅོས་རང་བཞིན་ལྷུན་གྱིས་གྲུབ་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ།། བདེ་ཞིང་སྐྱིད་པའི་འབྱུང་གནས་སུམ་རྩེན་ལྷ་ཡུལ་འདྲ་སོང་།། ཆོས་སྲིད་ལུགས་གཉིས་སྐྱོང་བའི་མི་དབང་ཆོས་རྒྱལ།། སྐུ་ཚེ་འགྱུར་མེད་བརྟན་པའི་མཛད་བཟང་སྙན་གྲགས་རྒྱས་སོང་།། ལུགས་གཉིས་ཉི་ཟླའི་སྣང་བ་སྔར་ལས་རྒྱས་པ།། བརྩེ་ཡུལ་མངའ་འབངས་ཡོངསས་ཀྱི་དགའ་སྐྱིད་གོང་དུ་འཕེལ་སོང་།། ཕུན་ཚོགས་པད་མའི་ཐང་ལ་དགའ་བའི་གླུ་ལེན།། སྐྱིད་པའི་བྲོ་གར་འཁྲབ་ཡོད་ཐུགས་བརྩེའི་སྤྱན་གྱིས་གཟིགས་སོང་།། ཆོས་སྲིད་གཉིས་ལྡན་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་རང་དབང་རང་བཙན།། འགྱུར་མེད་རང་དབང་ཡུན་དུ་གནས་པའི་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བཟང་སོང་།། །།
__label__dz ༄༅། །སེང་གདོང་མའི་ཐལ་རྡེབ་རྒྱུན་ཁྱེར་བཞུགས་སོ།། ༄༅། །སྐད་ཅིག་རང་ཉིད་མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ། །སེང་གེའི་གདོང་ཅན་སྐུར་གསལ་བའི། །ཐུགས་ཀའི་སྔགས་ཀྱི་འཕྲོ་འདུ་ཡིས། །གནོད་བྱེད་མ་ལུས་ཚར་བཅད་གྱུར།། ཨཿཀཿསཿམཿརཿཙཿཤཿདཿརཿསཿམཱཿརཿཡཿཕཊཿ ཅེས་ཅི་ནུས་བཟླས་མཐར། ན་མོ། རྩ་བརྒྱུད་བླ་མ་ཡི་དམ་ལྷ། །མཁའ་འགྲོ་བདུད་འདུལ་དྲག་མོ་ཡི། །བདེན་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་བྱིན་རླབས་ཀྱིས། །བདག་དང་རྒྱུ་འབྱོར་ཡོན་བདག་གི། །བྱད་ཁ་ཕུར་ཁ་རྦོད་གཏོང་སོགས། །མི་མཐུན་ཆག་ཆེ་ཉམ་ང་ཀུན། །སྡང་བར་བྱེད་པའི་དགྲ་ལ་བྷོ། །གནོད་པར་བྱེད་པའི་བགེགས་ལ་བྷོ། །བདུད་དགྲ་བྱད་མའི་སྟེང་དུ་བྷོ། །རྗེས་ཤུལ་མེད་པར་ཟློག་གྱུར་ཅིག །ཅེས་ཐལ་རྡེབ་བྱ། ཁྲོ་མོའི་རིག་སྔགས་ནུས་པའི་མཐུས། །བྱང་ཆུབ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་བར་ཆད་བདུད། །གནོད་བྱེད་མ་ལུས་ཚར་བཅད་ནས། །བསམ་དོན་ཡིད་བཞིན་འགྲུབ་པར་མཛོད།། །།
__label__dz ༉ བཀྲིས་བཀྲིས་བཀྲ་ལ་ཤིས།། བཀྲིས་རི་བོའི་རྩེ་མོ་ལུ།། བཀྲིས་རི་བོའི་རྩེ་མོ།། ལ་མོ་ལའི་བསངས་སེ་བསངས།། དགའ་ཡང་རང་ཡུལ་དགའ་སོང་།། མི་ཡུལ་ལས་ཀྱིས་བསྐོས་སོང་།། ལ་མོ་ལའི་བསངས་སེ་བསངས།། ཆུང་ཚེ་ཕ་མས་གསོ་བ།། ཕ་མ་བཀའ་དྲིན་ཆེ་སོང་།། ལ་མོ་ལའི་བསངས་སེ་བསངས།། སྦོམ་ཚེ་ཡོན་ཏན་ཐོབ་པ།། སློབ་དཔོན་བཀའ་དྲིན་ཆེ་སོང་།། ལ་མོ་ལའི་བསངས་སེ་བསངས།། །།
__label__dz རྩམ་པ་ནི་མཐོ་སྒངས་སུ་སྐྱེས་པས་ནས་རིགས་རྔོས་ནས་ཞིབས་འཐག་བྱས་པ་ཞིག་ཡིན་ལ། སྤྱིར་བོད་དུ་རྩམ་པ་ལ་ནས་རྩམ་དང་། གྲོ་རྩམ། སྲན་རྩམ་སོགས་རིགས་མང་པོ་ཡོད་པ་དང་། བོད་ཡོངས་རྫོགས་སུ་ཁྱབ་བརྡལ་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཆེ་བ་ནི་ནས་རྩམ་ཡིན། བོད་ཀྱི་གསོ་བ་རིག་པའི་སྨན་གཞུང་རྣམས་སུ་ནས་ནི་གྲ་མ་ཅན་གྱི་འབྲུ་ཡི་སྡེ་ལ་ངོས་འཛིན་པ་དང་། ནས་ལ་རིགས་མང་པོ་ཡོད་པ་དཔེར་ན། ནས་དཀར་དང་། ནས་སྔོན། ནས་ནག ནས་རྒོད་དམ་ནས་དམར་བཅས་ཡོད་ལ། ད་དུང་ཁྲ་མ་དང་། སོ་བ། ད་རྒན་སྟེ་ཡུག་པོ། སྲེ་ད་ཡང་ནས་ཀྱི་རིགས་སུ་འཇོག་ཚུལ་འདུག ནས་ཀྱི་ནུས་པ་ནི། ནས་དཀར་རྩུབ་བསིལ་ལྕི་མངར་ཁོང་ཅུང་འཁྲོག། བཤང་བའི་རླུང་འཕེལ་རོ་ཙ་བརྟས་པར་བྱེད།། གཅིན་ཚིལ་མཁྲིས་པ་བད་ཀན་ཆམ་པ་དང་།། ལུད་པ་དབུགས་མི་བདེ་བ་སེལ་བར་བྱེད།། ཅེས་དང་། ནས་སྔོན་བྱིས་གློ་ཚ་སུབ་རྒྱུ་གཟེར་སེལ།། ནས་ནག་རྨ་དང་ཤུ་བ་གདོན་ལ་ཕན།། ནས་རྒོད་གཞན་ལས་ཅུང་ཟད་དམན་པ་ཡིན།། ད་རྒན་ལྐོག་མའི་ནད་དང་པགས་ནད་སེལ།། སོ་བ་སྲེ་ད་བསིལ་ཡང བད་མཁྲིས་སེལ།། བུ་དང་ཟུག་རྔུ་འབྱིན་པར་བྱེད་པ་ཡིན།། ཞེས་སོགས་གསུངས་པ་ལྟར་རྩམ་པའི་ནུས་པ་བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ
__label__dz ༈ བྱམས་མགོན་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་མི་ཕམ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཉིན་བྱེདམཆོག་གི་ཞབས་བརྟན། ༈ ཨོཾ་སྭསྟི། མི་འགྱུར་བདེ་ཆེན་ཡེ་ཤེས་རོལ་མོའི་སྤྲིན། །ས་གསུམ་ཕན་བདེའི་གཉེན་དུ་ཡོངས་ཤར་བ། །རྩ་གསུམ་རྒྱལ་བ་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་བྱིན་རླབས་ཀྱིས། །མི་ཕམ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཉིན་བྱེད་ཞབས་བརྟན་གསོལ། །ངོ་མཚར་དགའ་ལྡན་ཞིང་གི་མགོན་པོ་ཉིད། །འདུལ་བྱའི་འགྲོ་ལ་རྗེས་ཆགས་སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ། དམ་པའི་ཡོན་ཏན་དཔལ་གྱིས་མཛེས་བཞིན་དུ། །བསྟན་པའི་སྒྲོན་མེ་མཆོག་ཏུ་ཞབས་བརྟན་གསོལ། །དེ་ལྟར་གསོལ་བཏབ་བསླུ་མེད་བདེན་མཐུ་ཡིས། །མགོན་ཁྱོད་བསྟན་དང་འགྲོ་བའི་སྤྱི་དཔལ་དུ། །ཞབས་ཟུང་རྡོ་རྗེའི་ཁྲི་ལས་མི་གཡོ་བར། །བསྐལ་བརྒྱར་ཆོས་འཁོར་སྐོར་བཞིན་བཞུགས་སུ་གསོལ། །ཞེས་པའང་སྐྱབས་རྗེ་ཁྲི་རབས་༧༠ པ་སྤྲུལ་སྐུ་འཇིགས་མེད་ཆོས་ཀྱིས་གྲགས་པས་སྨོན་པའོ།
__label__dz ༉ དགོན་ལ་ཨྱོན་པདྨའི་ལུང་བསྟན་དང་།། འབངས་ལ་སྤྱི་ཡོངས་བསོད་ནམས་དུས་གཅིག་སྨིན།། དུས་ལ་འདི་རིང་བཀྲིས་གཡང་ཆགས་གཉིས།། མགོན་ལ་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་སྤྱི་བོའི་གཙུག་ཏུ་བཀུར།། དུས༌ལ་འདི་རིང་དགའ་སྐྱིད་ལྡན་པའི་ཉིནམ།། མགོན་ལ་ཆོས་རྒྱལ༌གསེར༌ཁྲི་མངའ་གསོལ་བཟང་།། གདུང་ལ་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱིས་མཐོ་བའི་ལྷ་སྲས་མཆོག། དཔལ་ལ་ཨྱོན་དབང་ཕྱུག་ལྗོངས་འདིའི་མགོན། དུས་ལ་འདི་རིང་བཀྲིས་གཡང་ཆགས་གཉིས།། མགོན་ལ་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་སྤྱི་བོའི་བཙུག་ཏུ་བཀུར།། ས༌ལ༌འདི༌རིང༌དགའ༌སྐྱིད༌ལྡན༌པའི་ཉིནམ།། མགོན་ལ་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་གསེར་ཁྲི་མངའ༌གསོལ༌བཟང་།། ཕ་ལ་ཨྱོན་པདྨ་བྱིན་རླབས་ཆེ།། ལྷ་ལ་ཆོས་སྐྱོང་སྲུང་མ་འཕྲིན་ལས་མྱུར།། དུས་ལ་འདི་རིང་བཀྲིས་གཡང་ཆགས་གཉིས།། མགོན་ལ་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་སྤྱི་བོའི་བཙུག་ཏུ་བཀུར།། དུས་ལ་འདི་རིང་དགའ་སྐྱིད་ལྡན་པའི་ཉིནམ།། མགོན་ལ་ཆོས་རྒྱལ༌གསེར་ཁྲི༌མངའ་གསོལ༌བཟང་།། ལྗོངས་ལ་འདི་ལ་བདེ་སྐྱིད་འབྱུང་བའི་གནས།། མགོན་ལ་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་ཡབ་སྲས་སྐུ་ཚེ་བརྟན།། དུས་ལ་འདི་རིང་བཀྲིས་གཡང་ཆགས་གཉིས།། མགོན་ལ་ཆོས་རྒྱལ་སྤྱི་བོའི་བཙུག་ཏུ་བཀུར།། །།
__label__dz སྤ་རོ་རྫོང་ཁག་འདི འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ནང་་རྫོང་ཁག ༢༠ ཡོད་པའི་ནང་ལས་ ས་ཆ་དགའ་ཤོས་ཅིག་ཨིན། རྫོང་ཁག་བདག་སྐྱོང་ལྟེ་བ་ རིན་སྤུང་རྫོང་འདི་ སྤྱི་ལོ་ ༡༦༤༤/༤༥ ལོ་ལུ་ དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་གཅིག་བསྒྲིལ་བཟོ་གནང་མི་ མཐུ་ཆེན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལཔོ་ ཞབས་དྲུང་ངག་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གྱིས་བཞེངས་ཏེ་ ཕྱག་ལས་རབ་གནས་ཐོབ་པའི་རྫོང་གཞི་བྱིན་རླབས་ཅན་ཅིག་ཨིན་མས། དོལ་སྟེང་རྒེད་འོག དོལ་ཤར་རྒེད་འོག རྡོ་དཀར་རྒེད་འོག ནགསརྒྱ་རྒེད་འོག བཙན་གདོང་རྒེད་འོག ཝང་ཅང་རྒེད་འོག ལམ་གོང་རྒེད་འོག ལུང་གཉིས་རྒེད་འོག ཤར་པའི་རྒེད་འོགས ཧཱུྂ་རལ་རྒེད་འོག ཁོར་ཡུག མགྲོན་ཁང་། ལོ་རྒྱུས། ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ། ཡུལ་ཚོ། མིང་ཐོགས་ཚུལ། དུས་ཆེན། མི་སྣ། པར་རིས་བར་འཁྱམས། ཟིན་ཐོ་འམ་དཔྱད་གཞི། དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཀར་ཆག། ད་དུང་གཟིགས། ལྟ་རྫོང་། (སྤ་རོ) སྤ་རོ་རིན་སྤུང་རྫོང འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་རྫོང་། ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས་དྲ་མཐུད། སྤ་རོ་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་འཛུལ་སྒོ་ སྤ་རོ་རྫོང་ཁག
__label__dz སྤུ་ན་ཁ་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་ཡུལ་ ཁོར་ཡུག སྤུ་ན་ཁ་ མགྲོན་ཁང་། ལོ་རྒྱུས། ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ། ཡུལ་ཚོ། མིང་བཏགས་ཚུལ། དུས་ཆེན། མི་སྣ། པར་རིས་བར་འཁྱམས། ཟིན་ཐོ་འམ་དཔྱད་གཞི། དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཀར་ཆག། ད་དུང་གཟིགས། ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས་དྲ་མཐུད། ཁམས་གསུམ་གཡུལ་ལས་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་མཆོད་རྟེན།
__label__dz ༄༅། །རྗེ་མར་མི་ཡབ་སྲས་ཀྱིས་གསུངས་པའི་སྨོན་ལམ་བཞུགས་སོ།། ༄༅། །རྗེ་བླ་མ་རྣམས་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ལོ། །ལས་ཅན་ཆོས་དང་མཐུན་པའི་བུ། །ཆོས་སྐུ་སངས་རྒྱས་འགྲུབ་པར་ཤོག། །ངག་རྡོ་རྗེའི་བཟླས་པ་བདུད་རྩིའི་རོས། །རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ལོངས་སྐུར་འགྲུབ་པར་ཤོག། །སེམས་རྩ་བ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སྡོང་པོ་ལོ། །སྤྲུལ་སྐུའི་ལོངས་འདབ་རྒྱས་པར་ཤོག། །བླ་མའི་བཀའ་ཚིག་རྡོ་རྗེའི་གསུང་། །སྙིང་ལ་བརྗེད་མེད་གནས་པར་ཤོག། །ཡི་དམ་མཁའ་འགྲོའི་བྱིན་རླབས་དེ། །སྲོག་གི་རྩ་བར་གནས་པར་ཤོག། །ཆོས་སྐྱོང་སྲུང་མའི་རྒྱབ་རྟེན་དེས། །འབྲལ་བ་མེད་པར་སྐྱོང་བར་ཤོག། །རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བཟང་མོའི་སྨོན་ལམ་དེ། །མྱུར་བ་ཉིད་དུ་འགྲུབ་པར་ཤོག། །ཆོས་མཛད་ཀུན་གྱི་སྨོན་ལམ་དེས། །དུས་གསུམ་ཀུན་ཏུ་འཛིན་པར་ཤོག། །ཅེས་པ་མར་པས་ཞལ་ནས་གསུངས་པའོ།།
__label__dz བོད་ཀྱི་ལོ་ཐོའི་སྟེང་སོ་ནམ་འཁོར་ལོ་དང་ཐོང་གཤོལ་འཁོར་ལོ་ཞེས་རི་མོ་གཉིས་བཀོད་ཡོད་ཅིང་། ཐོང་གཤོལ་འཁོར་ལོའི་སྟེང་གི་ཨང་ཀི་ཡང་རྒྱུ་སྐར་ཉེར་བདུན་མཚོན་བྱེད་ཡིན་ཞིང་། ཉི་མས་འཁྱུད་པའི་སྐར་མ་ནས་གཤོལ་ལྕགས་ཀྱི་རྩེ་ལ་གཉིས་བཀོད་དེ། ས་མཐོང་ལ་གསུམ། མི་མཐོང་ལ་གསུམ། འཆང་བཟུང་ལ་གཉིས། གཤོལ་ཟླ་ལ་བཅུ། གཉའ་ཤིང་ལ་བརྒྱད་བཀོད་དེ། ཟླ་བ་རྒྱུ་སྐར་ཉེར་བདུན་གྱི་གཞི་ཁྱོན་གང་དུ་གནས་པའི་སྐར་མ་དེ་གཤོལ་ལྕགས་ཀྱི་རྩེ་གཉིས་ལ་སོང་ན་བཙའ་ཡིས་འཁྱེར་བ་ཐེ་ཚོམ་མེད་པ་དང་། ས་མཐོང་གསུམ་ལ་སོང་ན་ལོ་ལེགས་ཀྱང་སྲོག་ཆགས་ལ་སྡང་བ། མི་མཐོང་གསུམ་ལ་སོང་ན་འབྲུ་རིགས་འཕེལ་ཞིང་ལེགས་པ། འཆང་བཟུང་ལ་སོང་ན་ལོ་ནད་འབྱུང་བ། གཉའ་ཤིང་ལ་སོང་ན་དགྲ་ཡིས་འཇོམས་པའི་དོགས་པ། གཤོལ་ཟླ་བཅུ་ལ་སོང་ན་བཏང་སྙོམས་བྱེད་པ་སོགས་ངོ་སྤྲོད་རགས་ཙམ་ཞུས་པའོ། །
__label__dz ༈ མགོན་པོའི་གསེར་སྐྱེམས་བཞུགས་སོ།། ༈ བླ་མ་ཡི་དམ་ཡེ་ཤེས་མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ། །ཁྲག་འཐུང་རྒྱལ་པོའི་རྣམ་ཐར་གསུམ་གྱི་ཡུམ། །བདེ་ཆེན་གཅིག་ཏུ་འཆར་བའི་ལྷ་ཚོགས་ལ། །གསེར་སྐྱེམས་འབུལ་ལོ་བཅོལ་བའི་འཕྲིན་ལས་མཛོད། །མཧཱ་ཀཱ་ལ་ལྕམ་དྲལ་ཐམས་ཅད་དང་། །རེ་ཏི་མཆེད་བཞི་སྒོ་མཚམས་ལྷ་མོ་བརྒྱད། །ཆོས་ཀྱི་དབྱིངས་ལས་འཆར་བའི་ཁྲག་འཐུང་ལ། །གསེར་སྐྱེམས༴ །འཇིགས་བྱེད་ཆེན་མོ་བརྒྱད་དང་ཉི་ཤུ་བཞི། །སྒོ་བཞིའི་ཞིང་སྐྱོང་མ་མོ་མཁའ་འགྲོའི་ཚོགས། །རྩ་རླུང་ཁམས་ལས་འཆར་བའི་ལྷ་ཚོགས་ལ། །གསེར་སྐྱེམས༴ བཀའ་སྡོད་སྡེ་བརྒྱད་ཕྱོགས་སྐྱོང་རྒྱལ་པོ་བཞི། །བཙུན་མོ་ནང་མི་གཉེན་དང་དམག་གི་ཚོགས། །འཇིག་རྟེན་ལས་ལས་གྲུབ་པའི་དྲེགས་པ་ལ། །གསེར་སྐྱེམས་འབུལ་ལོ་བཅོལ་བའི་འཕྲིན་ལས་མཛོད།། །།
__label__dz ༉ འོག་མིན་ཞིང་བཀོད་འདྲ་བའི།། དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ།། དགའ་སྐྱིད་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པའི།། རྟེན་འབྲེལ་སྔར་ལས་བཟང་སོང་།། ནང་གི་ནོར་བུ་འདྲ་བ།། མངའ་བདག་སྐུ་ཚེ་བརྟན་ཤོག། ཕྱི་ཡི་ལྕགས་རི་འདྲ་བ།། བློན་འབངས་དར་ཞིང་རྒྱས་ཤོག། ཆོས་སྲིད་ལུགས་གཉིས་བསྟན་པ།། མི་ཉམས་ཡུན་དུ་གནས་ཤོག། རྒྱལ་ཁབ་མངའ་ཐང་དཔལ་འབྱོར།། ཡར་རྒྱས་གོང་འཕེལ་གནང་ཤོག། ནང་གི་ནོར་བུ་འདྲ་བ།། མངའ་བདག་སྐུ་ཚེ་བརྟན་ཤོག། ཕྱི་ཡི་ལྕགས་རི་འདྲ་བ།། བློན་འབངས་དར་ཞིང་རྒྱས་ཤོག། སངས་རྒྱས་བསྟན་པའི་སྲོག་ཤིང་།། དགེ་འདུན་འདུས་པའི་སྡེ་ཚོགས།། ཆོས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་བསྐོར་ཞིང་། འགྲོ་རྣམས་ཐར་པར་འདྲེན་ཤོག། ནང་གི་ནོར་བུ་འདྲ་བ།། མངའ་བདག་སྐུ་ཚེ་བརྟན་ཤོག། ཕྱི་ཡི་ལྕགས་རི་འདྲ་བ།། བློན་འབངས་དར་ཞིང་རྒྱས་ཤོག། དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་བུ་བརྒྱུད། ན་གཞོན་ཕོ་མོའི་ཚོགས་རྣམས།། ལྷག་བསམ་དག་པའི་སེམས་ཀྱིས།། རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཞབས་ཏོག་ཞུ་ཤོག། ནང་གི་ནོར་བུ་འདྲ་བ།། མངའ་བདག་སྐུ་ཚེ་བརྟན་ཤོག། ཕྱི་ཡི་ལྕགས་རི་འདྲ་བ།། བློན་འབངས་དར་ཞིང་རྒྱས་ཤོག། ད་རེས་བྱོན་པའི་སྐུ་མགྲོན། སྐུ་ཚེ་ཉི་ཟླ་མཉམ་ཤོག། ཞལ་ལ་ཡང་ཡང་མཇལ་བའི།། བཀྲིས་སྨོན་ལམ་ཞུ་གེ། ནང་གི་ནོར་བུ་འདྲ་བ།། མངའ་བདག་སྐུ་ཚེ་བརྟན་ཤོག། ཕྱི་ཡི་ལྕགས་རི་འདྲ་བ།། བློན་འབངས་དར་ཞིང་རྒྱས་ཤོག། །།
__label__dz ༉ ཆུ་རིས་མོ་ཡ་ལ་སོ།། དགུང་སངས་ཀྱི་མཐོན་པོ།། དགུང་དང་ཁྲི་གདུགས་ཉི་མ།། ཞབས་བྲོ་བཞེས་ལ་ཕེབས་ཤོག། དགུང་དང་ཁྲི་གདུགས་ཉི་མ།། ལྟད་མོ་གཟིགས་ལ་ཕེབས་ཤོག། ཆུ་རིས་མོ་ཡ་ལ་སོ།། གངས་སྟོད་ཀྱི་མཐོན་པོ།། གངས་དང་སེང་ཆེན་དཀར་མོ།། ཞབས་བྲོ་བཞེས་ལ་ཕེབས་ཤོག། གངས་དང་སེང་ཆེན་གཉིས་ཀུ།། ལྟད་མོ་གཟིགས་ལ་ཕེབས་ཤོག། ཆུ་རིས་མོ་ཡ་ལ་སོ།། སྤང་གཤོང་གི་བདེ་མོ།། སྤང་དང་ཤཝ་རྒྱས་རྭ་བཅུ།། ཞབས་བྲོ་བཞེས་ལ་ཕེབས་ཤོག། སྤང་དང་ཤཝ་རྒྱས་གཉིས་པོ།། ལྟད་མོ་གཟིགས་ལ་ཕེབས་ཤོག། ཆུ་རིས་མོ་ཡ་ལ་སོ།། མཚོ་སྟོད་ཀྱི་མཐོན་པོ།། མཚོ་དང་གསེར་མིག་ཉ་མོ།། ཞབས་བྲོ་བཞེས་ལ་ཕེབས་ཤོག། མཚོ་དང་གསེར་མིག་གཉིས་པོ།། ལྟད་མོ་གཟིགས་ལ་ཕེབས་ཤོག། །།
__label__dz པདྨ་དགའ་ཚལ་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག ལུ། འབྲུག་ཡུ ཁོར་ཡུག མགྲོན་ཁང་། ལོ་རྒྱུས། ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ། ཡུལ་ཚོ། མིང་ཐོགས་ཚུལ། དུས་ཆེན། མི་སྣ། པར་རིས་བར་འཁྱམས། ཟིན་ཐོ་འམ་དཔྱད་གཞི། དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཀར་ཆག། ད་དུང་གཟིགས། ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས་དྲ་མཐུད། འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག
__label__dz ༉ གཡུས་ཕྱོགས་ལྷ་ལས་དགའ་བ།། དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་ཞིང་ཁམས།། བདེ་དང་སྐྱིད་པའི་མེ་ཏོག།རི་ལུང་མེད་པར་ཤར་སོང་།། ལས་སྨོན་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ལྡན་པ།། མངའ་འབངས་པདྨའི་གླིང་ལ།། མི་དབང་ཁྲི་གདུགས་ཉི་མའི།། འོད་ཀྱིས་ཁྱབ་པ་ལེགས་སོ།། ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ།། ལས་སྣ་བརྒྱ་དང་རྩ་བརྒྱད།། བསམ་བློ་གང་ནས་བཏང་ཀྱང་།། སྔར་ལས་དར་ཞིང་རྒྱས་སོང་།། མངའ་བདག་མི་འགྱུར་སེངྒེ།། མངའ་འབངས་མི་འགྱུར་འབྲུག་པ།། འགྱུར་མེད་སེང་འབྲུག་གཉིས་པོ།། འགྱུར་མེད་སྨོན་ལམ་ཞུའོ།། །།
__label__dz རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་ལས་རྟགས་འདི་ དབྱིབས་ཐད་སྒོར་སྒོར་སྦེ་ཡོདཔ་དང་ དེ་ནང་ མེ་ཏོག་པདྨའི་གུ་ལུ་ འབྲུག་གཉིས་ཁ་འཐབ་རྐྱབ་སྟེ་ཡོདཔ་ཨིན། འབྲུག་གཉིས་ཀྱི་སྦུག་ལུ་ རྡོ་རྗེ་རྒྱ་འགྲམ་ཡོད་མི་དེ་གིས་ རྒྱལ་སྲིད་དང་ཆོས་སྲིད་གཉིས་ ཟུང་འབྲེལ་དུ་གནས་པའི་བརྡ་མཚོན་ཨིནམ་དང་ མེ་ཏོག་པདྨ་དེ་ རྣམ་དཀར་དམ་ཚིག་གཙང་མའི་བརྡ་མཚོན་ཨིན། དེ་ལས་ འབྲུག་གི་ལག་པར་ནོར་བུ་ཡོད་མི་དེ་ རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་རང་དབང་རང་བཙན་དང་ དཔལ་འབྱོར་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་དར་ཤིང་རྒྱས་པའི་བརྡ་མཚོན་ཨིན། ཟུར་ཁ་ལས་འབྲུག་ ཕོ་མོ་གཉིས་ཁ་འཐབ་རྐྱབ་ཡོད་མི་དེ་ ང་བཅས་ར་དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་མིང་གི་བརྡ་མཚོན་ཨིན། འབྲུག་ཡུལ་ འབྲེལ་མཐུད། https://web.archive.org/web/20121113145512/http://www.bhutan.gov.bt/government/abt_nationalsymbols.php http://www.un.int/wcm/content/site/bhutan/pid/7056 འབྲུག་ཡུལ་
__label__dz ཁོར་ཡུག མགྲོན་ཁང་། ལོ་རྒྱུས། ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ། ཡུལ་ཚོ། མིང་ཐོགས་ཚུལ། དུས་ཆེན། མི་སྣ། པར་རིས་བར་འཁྱམས། ཟིན་ཐོ་འམ་དཔྱད་གཞི། དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཀར་ཆག། ད་དུང་གཟིགས། ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས་དྲ་མཐུད། རྩི་རང་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་འཛུལ་སྒོ་ རྩི་རང་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག
__label__dz ༉ སྐྱིད་པའི་བདེ་ཆེན་ཆོས་གླིང་།། པདྨའི་དཔལ་ཐང་ལ།། གསེར་གྱི་གཞོང་པ་འདྲ་དོ།། རིགས་བཟང་བུ་མོ་རུ་རུ།། གསེར་གྱི་གཞོང་པའི་ནང་དུ།། པདྨའི་དཔལ་ཐང་ལ།། རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཕོ་བྲང་བཞེངས་ཡོད།། རིགས་བཟང་བུ་མོ་རུ་རུ།། རྩེ་མོག་སེར་ཏོག་སྤུབས་པ།། པདྨའི་དཔལ་ཐང་ལ།། ནམ་མཁའི་དབྱིངས་ལས་མཐོ་བྱུང་།། རིགས་བཟང་བུ་མོ་རུ་རུ།། ཉིམ་དང་ཟླ་བས་མ་གཏོགས།། པདྨའི་དཔལ་ཐང་ལ།། གཞན་གྱིས་མཇལ་ས་མིན་འདུག། རིགས་བཟང་བུ་མོ་རུ་རུ།། སྐེད་པ་རིན་ཆེན་སྣ་ལྔ་།། པདྨའི་དཔལ་ཐང་ལ།། མངའ་བདག་གོང་མ་བཞུགས་ཡོད།། རིགས་བཟང་བུ་མོ་རུ་རུ།། རྩ་བ་ལྕགས་རིས་བསྐོར་བ།། པདྨའི་དཔལ་ཐང་ལ།། གཡུ་ཡི་རྡོ་གཅལ་བསྒྲིགས་ཡོད།། རིགས་བཟང་བུ་མོ་རུ་རུ།། གཡུ་ཡི་རྡོ་གཅལ་སྟེང་ལ།། པདྨའི་དཔལ་ཐང་ལ།། རྨ་བྱའི་སྒྲོ་རིས་ཤིག་ཤིག། རིགས་བཟང་བུ་མོ་རུ་རུ།། །།
__label__dz ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ་ནི་ལྟ་སྐོར་བྱེད་བཞིན་གནས་དང་གནས་རྒྱུད་ནས་སྐྱོད་པར་གོ་བར་སྙམ། དབྱིན་ཇིར་ Tourism ཟེར ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ་བ་ནི་ལྗོངས་རྒྱུར་བྱེད་མཁན་ལ་གོ་ དབྱིན་ཇིའི་སྐད་དུ Traveller ཡང་ན་ Tourist རྐང་འགྲུལ་ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ་ནི་རྐང་ཐང་དུ་སྐྱོད་པའི་ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ་བར་གོ། དབྱིན་ཇིའི་སྐད་དུ Trekker དེ་བཞིན་རྐང་འགྲུལ་ནི་རྐང་ཐང་དུ་བགྲོད་པའི་བྱ་བར་གོ་དགོས་ན་དབྱིན་ཇིའི་སྐད་དུ་ཡང་Trek དང་ Hike ལ་གོའོ། ནང་དོན་དཀར་ཆག
__label__dz ཡེ་ཤུའི་ལྷ་ཁང་འདི་ རང་དབང་རང་བཙན་ཅིག་ཡིན་ནམ་དང་ ལྷ་ཁང་འདི་ སྤྱི་ལོ་ ༡༩༡༧ ལ་ རྒྱ་ནག་གི་རྒྱལ་ས་ལྟེ་བ་ བེ་ཇིང་ལུ་བཞེངས་ནུག། ད་རེས་ནངས་པར་ རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ ༤༥ དང་གླིང་ཆེན་ ༦ གི་ནང་ལུ་ འཐུས་མི་ས་ཡ་ ༡.༥ ཡོདཔ་ཨིན། ལྷ་ཁང་འདི་ དུས་རབས་ ༢༠ པའི་སྔ་གོང་ལས་བྱུང་བའི་ཡེ་ཤུའི་པེན་ཊི་ཀོསི་ཊཱལ་ཡན་ལག་གི་གྱལ་ཁར་ཚུདཔ་ཨིན། དེ་ཚུ་ སྤྱི་ལོ་ ༡༩༤༩ ལུ་ རྒྱ་ནག་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་འདི་ དམངས་སྙོམས་རིམ་ལུགས་ཀྱིས་མ་དབང་བའི་སྐབས་ལས་ བྱུང་ཡོད་པའི་རྒྱ་ནག་རང་ཡུལ་ཡེ་ཤུའི་ལྷ་ཁང་གསུམ་གྱི་གྲས་ལས་གཅིག་ཨིན། ཁོང་ཚོའི་དམིགས་ཡུལ་འདི་ ཡེ་ཤུ་གཉིས་པ་མ་འབྱུང་བའི་སྔོན་མ་ལས་ མི་དམངས་ཡོངས་ལ་ ཡེ་ཤུའི་གསུང་རབ་བཤད་ནི་འདི་ཨིན་པས། ཡེ་ཤུའི་གྲུབ་མཐའ་གཙོ་བོ་ ༡༠ ཡོད་མི་དེ་ཡང་: ༡. སེམས་གསོ། ༢. ཡེ་ཤུའི་ཁྲུས་དབང་། ༣. རྐངམ་འཁྱུ་ནི། ༤. འདྲིས་མཐུན། ༥. བདུན་ཕྲག་དུས་བཟང་ངལ་གསོ། ༦. ཡེ་ཤུ། ༧. ཡེ་ཤུའི་གསུང་དེབ། ༨. ཐར་པ། ༩. ཡེ་ཤུའི་ལྷ་ཁང་། ༡༠. མཐའ་མའི་བཀའ་ཆད། ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐོར་ལས
__label__dz ༉ རི་འདི་གཡང་གི་རི་ལ།། ཕུ་ལ་ཡས་ཀྱི་གངས་རི་ཆུང་ཆུང་རེད།། རི་འདི་གཡང་གི་རི་ལ།། གངས་རི་ཆེ་བ་གཅིག་ལ་འགྱུར་བར་ཤོག། རི་འདི་གཡང་གི་རི་ལ།། གངས་རི་འདི་ལ་སེང་གེ་འཁོར་བར་ཤོག། རི་འདི་གཡང་གི་རི་ལ།། སེང་གི་འདི་ལ་གཡུ་རལ་རྒྱས་པར་ཤོག། རི་འདི་གཡང་གི་རི་ལ།། འདི་ནས་ཕར་གྱི་ནགས་རི་ཆུང་ཆུང་རེད།། རི་འདི་གཡང་གི་རི་ལ།། ནགས་རི་ཆེ་བ་གཅིག་ལ་འགྱུར་བར་ཤོག། རི་འདི་གཡང་གི་རི་ལ།། ནགས་རི་འདི་ལ་སྟག་གཟིག་འཁོར་བར་ཤོག། རི་འདི་གཡང་གི་རི་ལ།། སྟག་གཟིག་འདི་ལ་འཛུམ་དྲུག་རྒྱས་པར་ཤོག། རི་འདི་གཡང་གི་རི་ལ།། མདའ་ལ་མས་ཀྱི་ཆུ་མོ་ཆུང་ཆུང་རེད།། རི་འདི་གཡང་གི་རི་ལ།། ཆུ་མོ་ཆེ་བ་གཅིག་ལ་འགྱུར་བར་ཤོག། རི་འདི་གཡང་གི་རི་ལ།། ཆུ་མོ་འདི་ལ་ཉ་མོ་འཁོར་བར་ཤོག། རི་འདི་གཡང་གི་རི་ལ།། ཉ་མོ་འདི་ལ་གསེར་གཤོག་རྒྱས་པར་ཤོག། རི་འདི་གཡང་གི་རི་ལ།། །།
__label__dz ༉ ས་འདི་འཛམ་བུ་གླིང་ལ།། བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་སོང་།། མཉམ་རོགས་གཞོན་པའི་དགའ་སྤྲོ།། གླུ་གར་མཆོད་པ་ཕུལ་གེ།། བདེ་སྐྱིད་གཉིས་དང་ལྡན་པ།། སྨན་ལྗོངས་འབྲུག་གི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ།། ལྷ་ཡུལ་ས་ལ་འཕོས་འདྲ།། དགའ་སྐྱིད་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས་སོང་།། ང་ཚོ་བུ་དང་བུ་མོས།། དགའ་སྐྱིད་གླུ་གར་མཆོད་པ།། སྐྱབས་གནས་ལྷ་ལ་ཕུལ་བས།། ཕྱོགས་ལས་རྣམ་པར་རྒྱལ་སོང་།། །།
__label__dz ༈ ཟས་མཆོད་བསྡུས་པ་ནི། ༄༅། །མགོན་པོ་ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེ་ལྡན་པ། །ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ་སྟོན་པ་པོ། །བསོད་ནམས་ཡོན་ཏན་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་གཞི། །དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་ལ་གསོལ་བ་འདེབས། །དག་པ་འདོད་ཆགས་བྲལ་བའི་རྒྱུ། །དགེ་བས་ངན་སོང་ལས་གྲོལ་ཞིང་། གཅིག་ཏུ་དོན་དམ་མཆོག་གྱུར་པ། །ཞི་གྱུར་ཆོས་ལ༴ །གྲོལ་ ནས་གྲོལ་བའི་ལམ་ཡང་སྟོན། །བསླབ་པ་དག་ལ་རབ་ཏུ་གུས། །ཞིང་གི་དམ་པ་ཡོན་ཏན་ཞིང་། །དགེ་འདུན་ལ་ཡང༴ །དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་ཁྱེད་སྐུ་ཅི་འདྲ་དང་། །འཁོར་དང་སྐུ་ཚེའི་ཚད་དང་ཞིང་ཁམས་དང་། །ཁྱེད་ཀྱི་མཚན་མཆོག་བཟང་པོ་ཅི་འདྲ་བར། །དེ་འདྲ་ཁོ་ནར་བདག་སོགས་སྐྱེ་བར་ཤོག། སྟོན་པ་བླ་མེད་སངས་རྒྱས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ། །སྐྱོབ་པ་བླ་མེད་དམ་ཆོས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ། །འདྲེན་པ་བླ་མེད་དགེ་འདུན་རིན་པོ་ཆེ། །བླ་མེད་དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ་ལ་མཆོད་པ་འབུལ། སངས་རྒྱས་ཡོན་ཏན་བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ། །ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ། །དགེ་འདུན་ཡོན་ཏན་བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ། །བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ་ལ་དད་བྱས་པས། །རྣམ་པར་སྨིན་པའང་བསམ་མི་ཁྱབ། །རྣམ་དག་ཞིང་དུ་སྐྱེ་བར་ཤོག།
__label__dz ༉ དགུང་སྔོན་བཀྲིས་གཡང་ཆགས་ལགས།། ཨ་མ་ལེགས་ཨོ།། ཁྲི་གདུགས་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ།། དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་ཞབས་བྲོ།། དགུང་དང་སྤྲིན་གྱི་བར་ལ།། ཨ་མ་ལེགས་ཨོ།། སྐྱིའུ་བསེར་རླུང་གིས་འཐོར་སོང་།། དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་ཞབས་བྲོ།། དྲོད་ཉམས་འོད་ཀྱིས་སྐྱོང་བ།། ཨ་མ་ལེགས་ཨོ།། ཁྲི་གདུགས་བཀྲིན་ཆེ་སོང་།། དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་ཞབས་བྲོ།། ལྷོ་ལྗོངས་བཀྲིས་གཡང་ཆགས་ལ།། ཨ་མ་ལེགས་ཨོ།། མངའ་བདག་ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུ།། དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་ཞབས་བྲོ།། ལོངས་སྤྱོད་སེམས་ལ་འཆང་བ་ལ།། ཨ་མ་ལེགས་ཨོ།། རྩ་གསུམ་ལ་ལྷ་ཡི་ཐུགས་རྗེ།། དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་ཞབས་བྲོ།། མི་སེར་བདེ་ཞིང་སྐྱིད་པ།། ཨ་མ་ལེགས་ཨོ།། མངའ་བདག་བཀྲིན་ཆེ་སོང་།། དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་ཞབས་བྲོ།། རྒྱལ་སྲིད་ཆོས་བཞིན་སྐྱོང་བ།། ཨ་མ་ལེགས་ཨོ།། བཤད་སྒྲུབ་བསྟན་པ་དར་སོང་།། དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་ཞབས་བྲོ།། །།
__label__dz ༄༅། དཔལ་འབྲུག་པའི་ལུགས་ཀྱི་ཉམས་བཞེས་སྐྱབས་འགྲོ་མ་ནམ་བཞི་སྐོར། ༄༅། །མ་ནམ་མཁའ་དང་མཉམ་པའི་སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་བླ་མ་སངས་རྒྱས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐུ་ལ་སྐྱབས་སུ་མཆིའོ། །མ་ནམ་མཁའ་དང་མཉམ་པའི་སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་བླ་མ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་རྫོགས་པའི་སྐུ་ལ་སྐྱེས་སུ་མཆིའོ། །མ་ནམ་མཁའ་དང་མཉམ་པའི་སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་བླ་མ་ཐུགས་རྗེ་སྤྲུལ་པའི་སྐུ་ལ་སྐྱབས་སུ་མཆིའོ། །མ་ནམ་མཁའ་དང་མཉམ་པའི་སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་བླ་མ་སངས་རྒྱས་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་ལ་སྐྱབས་སུ་མཆིའོ། ཁ་ཐུན།
__label__dz ༄༅། །འཇམ་བསྟོད་གང་གི་བློ་གྲོས་མ་བཞུགས་སོ།། ༈ རྒྱ་གར་སྐད་དུ། ཤྲཱི་ཛྙཱ་ན་གུ་ཎཱ་བྷ་དྲ་ནཱ་མསྟུསྟི། བོད་སྐད་དུ། དཔལ་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཡོན་ཏན་བཟང་པོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་བསྟོད་པ། བླ་མ་དང་མགོན་པོ་རྗེ་བཙུན་འཇམ་དཔལ་དབྱངས་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ལོ། །གང་གི་བློ་གྲོས་སྒྲིབ་གཉིས་སྤྲིན་བྲལ་ཉི་ལྟར་རྣམ་དག་རབ་གསལ་བས། །ཇི་སྙེད་དོན་ཀུན་ཇི་བཞིན་གཟིགས་ཕྱིར་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཐུགས་ཀར་གླེགས་བམ་འཛིན། །གང་དག་སྲིད་པའི་བཙོན་རར་མ་རིག་མུན་འཐུམས་སྡུག་བསྔལ་གྱིས་གཟིར་བའི། །འགྲོ་ཚོགས་ཀུན་ལ་བུ་གཅིག་ལྟར་བརྩེ་ཡན་ལག་དྲུག་ཅུའི་དབྱངས་ལྡན་གསུང་། །འབྲུག་ལྟར་ཆེར་སྒྲོག་ཉོན་མོངས་གཉིད་སློང་ལས་ཀྱི་ལྕགས་སྒྲོག་འགྲོལ་མཛད་ཅིང་། མ་རིག་མུན་སེལ་སྡུག་བསྔལ་མྱུ་གུ་ཇི་སྙེད་གཅོད་མཛད་རལ་གྲི་བསྣམས། །གདོད་ནས་དག་ཅིང་ས་བཅུའི་མཐར་སོན་ཡོན་ཏན་ལུས་རྫོགས་རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཐུ་བོའི་སྐུ། །བཅུ་ཕྲག་བཅུ་དང་བཅུ་གཉིས་རྒྱན་སྤྲས་བདག་བློའི་མུན་སེལ་འཇམ་དཔལ་དབྱངས་ལ་འདུད། །གྲངས་མང་བསགས་ནས། བརྩེ་ལྡན་ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་མཁྱེན་རབ་འོད་ཟེར་གྱིས། །བདག་བློའི་གཏི་མུག་མུན་པ་རབ་བསལ་ནས། །བཀའ་དང་བསྟན་བཅོས་གཞུང་ལུགས་རྟོགས་པ་ཡི། །བློ་གྲོས་སྤོབས་པའི་སྣང་བ་སྩལ་དུ་གསོལ། །དགེ་བ་འདི་ཡིས་མྱུར་དུ་བདག །རྗེ་བཙུན་འཇམ་དབྱངས་འགྲུབ་གྱུར་ནས། །འགྲོ་བ་གཅིག་ཀྱང་མ་ལུས་པ། །དེ་ཡི་ས་ལ་འགོད་པར་ཤོག། །།
__label__dz ཤ་ཟའི་སེམས་ཅན་བརྐུ་གསོད ཚལ་མ་དང་རྡོ་ཕུང་གི་རྒྱབ་ལས་བལྟཝ་ད་ མི་མཐོང་ནི་གི་དོན་ལུ་དཔྱལཝ་ལེབ་ཏག་ ཏ་དང་རྣམ་ཅོ་ཐུང་ཀུ། ཉེན་ཁ ཁོང་གི་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག་གི་དོན་ལུ་བསདཔ་ཨིན། དུག་ ཟ་བའི་སྲོག་ཆགས་ངོ་མ་(མི་གི་ལོ་ཐོག་ལུ་གནོད་པའི་སྲོག་ཆགས་སྦེ་བརྩིཝ་ཨིན།) འཁྱམས་ས་ཉམས་མི་དེ་ཡང་མི་རིགས་ཀྱི་ལཱ་རིགས་ལས་བརྟེན་ཨིན། སྒོ་ཁའི་ཁྱི་ཚུ་གིས་བསདཔ་ཨིན། གཟུགས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པ རི་ཁའི་བྱི་ལི་ཚུ་ སྦོམ་ཆུང་སྒོ་ཁའི་བྱི་ལི་བཟུམ་སྦེ་ཡོད་རུང་ སྤུ་རིངམོ་སྦེ་སྟུག་དྲག་ཡོདཔ་ལས་ སྦོམ་སུ་སྦེ་མཐོངམ་ཨིན། ལྟ རི་ཁའི་བྱི་ལི་ཚུ་གིས་འཁྱམས་ས་གདམ་ཁ་རྐྱབ་ཨིན།ཟ་བའི་སེམས་ཅན་ལེ་ཤ་ཡོད། འཁྱམས་ས ེ་ཤི་ཡ་དབུས་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གངས་རི་དང་སྤང་ཤོང་། མི་ཀྲར་༥༠༠༠ / ཕིཏྲ་༡༦༠༠ཚུན་ཚོད། གཡིབས་ས རི་ཁའི་བྱི་ལི་ཚུ་ ཕྱག་ཕུག་དང་ས་དོང་ནང་གཡིབས་སྡོདཔ་ཨིན། བྱ་སྤྱོད བག་ཕེབས་ཏོག་ཏོ་དང་གསང་བྱ་ཅན། ཉིན་མ་དང་ནུབ་མོ་ཧུར་རི་རི། བྱག་ཕུག་དང་ས་དོང་ཚུ་ནང་སྡོདཔ་ཨིན། ཕྱུག་གུ་གི་སྦོམ་ཚད: ཕྱུག་གུ་༢-༦།(སྤྱི་ཟླ་གསུམ་པ་ – ལྔ་པའི་ནང་ཚརཝ་ཨིན) ཁུངས་གཏུག།
__label__dz བྲ་ཛིལ་ཀྱི་ས་ཁ་མཐོ་ས་(Planalto Brasileiro)ནི་བྲ་ཛིལ་ཀྱི་ས་ཁ་མཐོ་ས་སྦོམ་ཤོས་ཨིན།བྲ་ཛིལ་ཀྱི་ས་ཁངས་ཕྱེད་ཤར་ལུང་ཕྱོགས་ནང་ས་ཁ་མཐོ་ས་འདི་ཙམ་ནང་འདུག།ས་གནས་མཐོ་ཤོས་བྷན་དེའི་ར་རྩེ་ཀ་པ་ར་ཨོ་རི་རྒྱུད་ནང་ཨེས་པི་རི་ཏོ་སན་ཏོ་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཨིན་མཐོ་ཚེད་༢༨༩༢m། See Also བྲ་ཛིལ་ བཱརཱ་ཛིལ་ འཛམ་གླིང་རྒྱས་བཤད
__label__dz ཕོབ་སྦྱིས་ཁ་འདི་ དབང་འདུས་རྫོང་ཁག་གི་མངའ་འོག་ལུ་ས་གནས་དགའ་ཏོག་ཏོ་ཅིག་འབད་ཆགས་སྟེ་ཡོད། མིང་གི་འབྱུང་རབས ས་ཆའི་གནས་སྟངས དཔལ་འབྱོར་གནས་སྟངས མི་རིགས སྐྱེ་ལྡན་རིགས་སྣ སྔོ་ཤིང་ སྲོག་ཆགས་སྣ་ཚོགས འདབ་ཆགས
__label__dz རྒྱལ་པོའི་བརྟན་བཞུགས་འདི་ འགོ་དང་པ་ ༡༩༥༣ ལུ་ རྩོམ་སྒྲིག་འབད་འབདཝ་ཨིནམ་དང་ ༡༩༦༦ ལུ་ གཞུང་འབྲེལ་བཟོ་ཡོདཔ་ཨིན། རྒྱལ་པོའི་བརྟན་བཞུགས་ཀྱི་ཚིག། རྒྱལ་པོའི་བརྟན་བཞུགས། འབྲུག་ཙན་དན་བཀོད་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ན།། དཔལ་ལུགས་གཉིས་བསྟན་སྲིད་སྐྱོང་བའི་མགོན།། འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་པོ་མངའ་བདག་རིན་པོ་ཆེ།། སྐུ་འགྱུར་མེད་བརྟན་ཅིང་ཆབ་སྲིད་འཕེལ་།། ཆོས་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྟན་པ་དར་ཞིང་རྒྱས་།། འབངས་བདེ་སྐྱིད་ཉི་མ་ཤར་བར་ཤོག།། (Druk tsenden keipi gyelkhap na Pyel loog nig tyensi chongwei gyen Druk gyelpo ngadak rinpoche Koo jurmey tyentsing chap tsid pyel Che sangye tyenpa darshing gyel Bang deykyed nyima shar wara sho.) འབྲུག་ཡུལ། འབྲེལ་མཐུད། http://www.un.int/wcm/content/site/bhutan/pid/7054 འབྲུག་ཡུལ།
__label__dz སོ་ནམ་འཁོར་ལོ། བོད་ཀྱི་ལོ་ཐོའི་སྟེང་སོ་ནམ་འཁོར་ལོ་དང་ཐོང་གཤོལ་འཁོར་ལོ་ཞེས་རི་མོ་གཉིས་བཀོད་ཡོད་ཅིང་། སོ་ནམ་འཁོར་ལོ་ནི་རྩ་བ་གསུམ་དང་། རྩེ་མོ་དགུ འཕྲེད་དུ་རེ་ཁཱ་གསུམ་གྱིས་བཅད་ཅིང་། གཡས་དང་གཡོན་དུ་ཡན་ལག་བཅུ་གཉིས་ཏེ་རི་མོའི་སྟེང་བཀོད་པའི་ཨང་ཀི་རྣམས་རྒྱུ་སྐར་ཉེར་བདུན་གྱི་མཚོན་བྱེད་ཡིན་པ་དང་། ཉི་མས་འཁྱུད་པའི་སྐར་མ་དེ་ཏྲི་ཤུ་(རྩེ་གསུམ་ཡོད་པ་དེ་ལ་ཟེར)དབུས་མའི་རྩེ་མོར་བཀོད་དེ་དེ་ནས་རིམ་བཞིན་སྐར་མ་གཡས་སྐོར་དུ་བཀོད་མོད། མཐའ་མའི་སྐར་མ་བཞི་པོ་བར་གྱི་འཛོམས་བཞིར་གཡས་སྐོར་འགོད་པ་དང་། ཟླ་བ་རྒྱུ་སྐར་ཉེར་བདུན་གྱི་གཞི་ཁྱོན་གང་དུ་གནས་པའི་སྐར་མ་དེ་རྩེ་མོ་དགུ་ལ་སོང་ན་ལོ་འདིར་ལོ་ཏོག་འཕེལ་བ་དང་། རྩ་བ་གསུམ་ལ་སོང་ན་འབྲས་བུ་མེད་པ། བར་གྱི་འཛོམས་བཞིར་སོང་ན་བཏང་སྙོམས་སུ་ལུས་པ། ཡམ་ལག་བཅུ་གཉིས་ལ་སོང་ན་བདེ་ལེགས་འབྱུང་བ་ཡིན་ནོ།
__label__dz སྟག་ (Panthera tigris) འདི་གསོན་པོའི་གཅན་གཟན་གྱི་རིགས་སྦོམ་ཤོས་ཅིག་ཨིནམ་དང་ འདི་ཡང་ རིགས་མཚན་ Panthera གི་རིགས་ཅིག་ཨིན། སྟག་འདི་ཡང་ཁོང་གི་གཟུགས་ཁར་ཡོད་པའི་སྤུ་ལི་ཝང་གུར་ཁྲ་གནགཔོ་ཡོད་མི་དང་ གཟུགས་འོག་ཁ་ཐུག་དཀརཔོ་འབད་ཡོད་མི་འདི་ངོས་འཛིན་ཚུགས་པའི་རྟགས་མཚན་ཨིན། སྟག་འདི་སྤྱི་ཏོག་ཁ་གི་ཤ་ཟའི་སེམ་ཅན་ཅིག་འབདཝ་ལས་ ཤཝ་དང་རི་ཕག་ལ་སོགས་པའི་རྨིག་ཅན་གྱི་སེམས་ཅན་ཚུ་ཟཝ་ཨིན། འདི་ ས་གནས་དང་ སྤྱིར་བཏང་ལུ་ རང་རྐྱང་སྦེ་སྡོད་རུང་ མི་སྡེ་ནང་ལུ་ གནོད་འཚུབ་ཅན་ཅིག་ཨིན་མི་ རོ་ཁྱི་དང་ བུ་ཕྲུག་ཚུ་ལུ་ གནོད་འཚབ་རྐྱབ་ནི་དང་ འཛུགས་སྐྱོང་འབད་ནིའི་དོན་ལུ་ ས་གནས་ཀྱི་ ས་ཁོངས་སྦོམ་ཚུ་ དགོཔ་ཨིན། Panthera
__label__dz ༈ ལྷ་མོའི་གཉེར་གསོལ་ནི། བྷྱོཿ མཁའ་འགྲོ་མ་ནག་མོ་དུད་པའི་སོལ་བ་མ། །མ་ལྟར་མཉེས་གཤིན། རྒྱ་མཚོ་ལྟར་དཀྱེལ་ཆེ། རི་བོ་ལྟར་ལྷུན་ཆགས། ཉི་ཟླ་ལྟར་འོད་གསལ། ནོར་བུ་ལྟར་རེ་བ་སྐོང་བ། ཅི་བགྱིའི་དབང་ཕྱུག་མ་འཁོར་དང་བཅས་པ་ལ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པ་བདག་གིས་གཏད་གཉེར་དུ་བྱ་བའི་འོས། དངོས་གྲུབ་རྣམ་པ་གཉིས། བཀའ་དང་བསྟན་པ། ཆོས་དང་དམ་ཚིག །ཚེ་དང་བསོད་ནམས། ནད་མེད་པ་དང་བདེ་བ་དམ་པ།བསྐུལ་ཞིང་བཅོལ་བའི་ལས། སློབ་མ་དང་འཁོར། སྦྱིན་པོ་དང་འབངས། དཀོར་དང་ལོངས་སྤྱོད། མངའ་རིས་དང་དབང་ཕྱུག །སྡེ་དང་སྲིད། མཆོད་རྟེན་དང་གཙུག་ལག་ཁང་། དགོན་གནས་དང་ཡུལ་འཁོར་དུ་བཅས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་གཏད་ཀྱི། མཐུན་ཞིང་དགྱེས་པའི་རྟེན་རྫས་དམ་ཚིག་གི་གཟུགས་སུ་གྱུར་པ་འདི་རྣམས་ལ་བརྟན་པར་ཞུགས་ཏེ། གནས་ལུས་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་མཐུ་སྟོབས་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པར་གྱུར་པ། ལས་བཅོལ་ཞིང་གཏད་པ་འདི་མཐའ་དག་གི་གཉེར་ཁ་གྱིས་ལ། མི་མཐུན་པའི་ཕྱོགས་མཐའ་དག་ལས་སྲུངས། མཐུན་རྐྱེན་ཐམས་ཅད་སྒྲུབས། གོང་ནས་གོང་དུ་སྤེལ། སྙིང་ལ་གཅེས་པ་དང་བརྣག་པ་མ་དོར་བས་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་བར་དུ་བརྟན་པར་སྐྱོངས་ལ་ཡིད་བཞིན་དུ་འདོད་པ་འཇོ་བར་བྱོས་ཤིག།
__label__dz ༄༅། །འཇམ་དཔལ་མཚན་བརྗོད་བསྡུས་པ་བཞུགས་སོ།། ༈ རྒྱ་གར་སྐད་དུ༔ ཨཱརྱ་མཉྫ་ཤྲཱི་ཏནྟྲ་རཱ་ཛ་ཙིཏྟཿ བོད་སྐད་དུ༔འཕགས་པ་འཇམ་དཔལ་གྱི་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཡང་སྙིངཿ འཕགས་པ་འཇམ་དཔལ་གཞོན་ནུར་གྱུར་པ་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ལོ༔ འདི་ལྟར་སངས་རྒྱས་བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདསཿ ཡེ་ཤེས་སྐུ་སྟེ་རང་བྱུང་བ༔ ཡེ་ཤེས་མིག་གཅིག་དྲི་མ་མེདཿ ཡེ་ཤེས་སྣང་བ་ལམ་མེ་བ༔ ཨ་ར་པ་ཙ་ནཱ་ཡ་ཏེ་ན་མཿ ཡེ་ཤེས་སྐུ་ཉིད་ཁྱོད་ལ་འདུད༔ རྫོགས་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀུན་གྱིས་བཤད༔ བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་འཇམ་དཔལ་ཡེ་ཤེས་སེམས་དཔའི་མཚན་ཡང་དག་པར་བརྗོད་པ༔ བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་ཤཱཀྱ་ཐུབ་པའི་ཞལ་ནས་གསུངས་པ་རྫོགས་སོ། །།
__label__dz སྤ་རོ་གྱང་ས་ཟླུམ་བརྩེགས་ལྷ་ཁང་འདི་ གྲུབ་ཐོབ་ལྕགས་ཟམ་པ་ཐང་སྟོང་རྒྱལ་པོ་གིས་ རབ་བྱུང་ 8 པའམ་ དུས་རབ་ 15C པའི་ནང་ སྒང་གདུག་སྦྲུལ་ནག་པོ་ཁ་མར་ལྟ་རྒྱུགཔ་ཡིན་ཟེར་བའི་རི་མཇུག་སྦལ་གཟུགས་ཀྱི་སྣ་ལུ་ས་བདག་ཀླུ་གཉན་གྱི་ཁ་གནོན་འབད་བཞེངས་ཏེ་ཡོད་མི་ ཟླུམ་བརྩེགས་ལྷ་ཁང་ཐོག་ཚད་གསུམ་འབད་མི་འདི་མཇལ་ཡོད། སྤ་རོ་རྫོང་ཁག
__label__dz གཞལམ་སྒང་ནི་འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག་ཅིག་ཡིན་འབྲུག་ཡུ ཁོར་ཡུག མགྲོན་ཁང་། ལོ་རྒྱུསའཆག་ཚུལ། ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ། ཡུལ་ཚོ། མིང་ཐོགས་ཚུལ། དུས་ཆེན། མི་སྣ། པར་རིས་བར་འཁྱམས། ཟིན་ཐོ་འམ་དཔྱད་གཞི། དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཀར་ཆག། ད་དུང་གཟིགས། ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས་དྲ་མཐུད། འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག
__label__dz བོད་ཡུལ་རང་ནས་དར་བའི་གདོན་མའི་ཆོས་ལུགས་ཤིག དུས་རབས་རིམ་བྱུང་བརྒྱུད་བོད་ཀྱི་ནང་པའི་ཆོས་དང་ཕན་ཚུན་ཤུགས་རྐྱེན་དང་དང་ལེན་བྱས་པས། ད་ལྟ་བན་བོན་དབྱེ་བ་ཆེར་མེད་པ་དང་ཕན་ཚུན་སློབ་གཉེར་བྱེད་ཆོག་པ་ཡིན། སྟོན་པ་གཤེན་རབས།་བསྟན་པའི་ཆོས་ལུགས། ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྐོར་ལས
__label__dz ༈ འཇིག་དབང་གསོལ་བདེབས་ནི། ༈ འཇིག་རྟེན་དབང་ཕྱུག་ཐུགས་རྗེའི་རླབས་འཕྲེང་དབུས། །རྒྱལ་ཀུན་མཁྱེན་བརྩེའི་འདབ་སྟོང་རྒྱས་པ་ལ།། ཕན་བདེའི་དྲི་བསུང་ཅི་ཡང་སྤྲོ་བའི་གཉེན། །ངག་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཞབས་ལ་གསོལ་བ་འདེབས། །མཁྱེན་པས་མ་རིག་མུན་པའི་ཚོགས་འཇོམས་ཤིང་། །བརྩེ་བས་གཞན་དོན་ཡལ་བར་མི་འདོར་བར། །ནུས་པས་བདུད་དཔུང་འཇོམས་བྱེད་ལྷ་ཡི་ལྷ། །ངག་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་ཞབས་ལ་གསོལ་བ་འདེབས། །ཁམས་གསུམ་སེམས་ཅན་འཁོར་བ་ལས་སྒྲོལ་ཕྱིར། །འཆི་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེའི་སྐུ་མཆོག་རབ་བརྙེས་ནས། །ཕྲིན་ལས་རྣམ་བཞིས་འགྲོ་བའི་དོན་མཛད་པའི། །ཇི་སྲིད་འཚོ་ཞིང་གཞེས་པར་གྱུར་ཅིག་གུ། །བགྲང་ཅི་ནུས་བསགས་ནས། དེ་ལྟར་གསོལ་བ་བཏབ་པའི་མཐུ་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས། །བདག་དང་མཐའ་ཡས་འགྲོ་བ་མ་ལུས་པ། །མགོན་ཁྱོད་མཉེས་བྱས་གང་གི་རིང་ལུགས་ཀྱིས། །རྫོགས་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་མྱུར་དུ་ཐོབ་གྱུར་ཅིག །བླ་མ་སྐུ་ཁམས་བཟང་བར་གསོལ་བ་འདེབས། །མཆོག་ཏུ་སྐུ་ཚེ་རིང་བར་གསོལ་བ་འདེབས། །འཕྲིན་ལས་དར་ཞིང་རྒྱས་པར་གསོལ་བ་འདེབས། །བླ་མ་དང་འབྲལ་བ་མེད་པར་བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབས། །སྐྱེ་བ་ཀུན་ཏུ་ཡང་དག་བླ་མ་དང་། །འབྲེལ་མེད་ཆོས་ཀྱི་དཔལ་ལ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཅིང་། །ས་དང་ལམ་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་རབ་རྫོགས་ནས། །རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་གི་གོང་འཕང་མྱུར་ཐོབ་ཤོག། །།
__label__dz མི་ནས་ཞེ་རའིས་(པོར་ཅུ་གལ་ཁ་:Minas Gerais, MG)ནི་བྲ་ཛིལ་ཤར་ལྷོ་ལུང་ཕྱོགས་ནང་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཅིག་ཨིན།་རྒྱལ་ས་བྷེ་ལོ་འོ་རི་ཟོན་ཏེ་ཨིན།མི་འབོར་༢༠༥༩༣༣༦༦མི་དང་རྒྱ་ཚེད་༥༨༦༥༢༢km²། See Also བྲ་ཛིལ་ མན་ཅི་ཀེའི་ར་རི་རྒྱུད་ བཱརཱ་ཛིལ་
__label__dz ༉ བྱོན་པ་ལེགས་སོ་ལེགས་སོ།། ཤར་ཕྱོགས་རི་བོའི་རྩེ་ནས།། དཀར་གསལ་ཉི་ཟླ་གཉིས་ཀྱིས།། གླིང་བཞི་སྐྱོང་བ་ལེགས་སོ།། བྱོན་པ་ལེགས་སོ་ལེགས་སོ།། སུམ་རྩེན་ལྷ་ཡི་གླིང་ནས།། བརྒྱ་བྱིན་ལྷ་ཡི་སྲས་པོས།། རྣམ་ཀུན་གཟིགས་པ་ལེགས་སོ།། བྱོན་པ་ལེགས་སོ་ལེགས་སོ།། བྱང་ཕྱོགས་ལྕང་ལོ་ཅན་ནས།། རྣམ་སྲས་ནོར་ལྷའི་རྒྱལ་པོས།། དངོས་གྲུབ་གནང་བ་ལེགས་སོ།། བྱོན་པ་ལེགས་སོ་ལེགས་སོ།། ཡིད་བཞིན་ནོར་བུའི་གླིང་ནས།། དེད་དཔོན་ནོར་བུ་བཟང་པོས།། འདོད་དགུ་རྙེད་པ་ལེགས་སོ།། བྱོན་པ་ལེགས་སོ་ལེགས་སོ།། འོག་མིན་ཆོས་སྐུའི་ཞིང་ནས།། ཕ་གཅིག་དྲིན་ཅན་བླ་མས།། དུས་རྒྱུན་བརྩེ་བ་ལེགས་སོ།། བྱོན་པ་ལེགས་སོ་ལེགས་སོ།། འབྲུག་ཡུལ་སྐྱིད་པའི་ལྗོངས་སུ།། མི་དབང་མངའ་བདག་རྒྱལ་པོས།། ཆོས་སྲིད་སྐྱོང་བ་ལེགས་སོ།། བྱོན་པ་ལེགས་སོ་ལེགས་སོ།། སྐུ་མགྲོན་ལྷན་རྒྱས་ཚོགས་རྣམས།། ཐུགས་དགོངས་སྤྲོ་བའི་ངང་ནས།། ལྟད་མོ་གཟིགས་པ་ལེགས་སོ།། །།
__label__dz ༈ སྒྲོལ་མ་བསྡུས་པ་བཞུགས་སོ།། ཨོཾ༑ རྒྱལ་བ་ཀུན་གྱི་སྤྱན་སྔར་ཐུགས་བསྐྱེད་རྒྱལ་བའི་ཡུམ་གྱུར་མ་ལུས་རྒྱལ་བའི་འཕྲིན་ལས་ཀུན་སྒྲུབ་མ། །མྱུར་མ་དཔའ་མོ་དབྱངས་ཅན་མ་དང་བསོད་ནམས་མཆོག་གཏེར་རྣམས་རྒྱལ་རིག་བྱེད་མ་དང་འཇིགས་བྱེད་མ། །གཞན་གྱིས་མི་ཐུབ་གཞན་ལས་རྒྱལ་དང་སེང་ལྡེང་ནགས་ཀྱི་སྒྲོལ་མ་འཇིག་རྟེན་གསུམ་རྒྱལ་ནོར་སྟེར་མ། །བཀྲ་ཤིས་དོན་བྱེད་དགྲ་དཔུང་འཇོམས་མཛད་ཁྲོ་གཉེར་ཅན་མཛད་རབ་ཞི་མ་དང་འབར་བའི་འོད་ཅན་མ། །དཔག་མེད་གནོན་མ་རྨ་བྱ་ཆེན་པོ་མི་ཕམ་རྒྱལ་མོ་རི་ཁྲོད་མ་དང་འོད་ཟེར་ཅན་མར་འདུད། །འགྲོ་ཀུན་སྲིད་པའི་འཚོ་ལས་སྒྲོལ་ཕྱིར་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཐོབ་འདོད་བདག་ཀྱང་ཁྱེད་ལ་རེ་འོ་རྗེ་བཙུན་མ། །ཨོཾ་ཏཱ་རེ་ཏུཏྟ་རེ་ཏུ་རེ་སྭཱཧཱ། །སེང་གེ་གླང་ཆེན་མེ་སྦྲུལ་ཆོམ་རྐུན་དང་། །ལྕགས་སྒྲོག་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཤ་ཟའི་འཇིགས་པ་རྣམས། །ཞི་མཛད་ཟླ་བའི་འོད་ལྟར་བསིལ་བའི་སྐུ། །རྗེ་བཙུན་སྒྲོལ་མ་ཡུམ་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་བསྟོད། །དགེའོ།།
__label__dz ཌེ་བི་ཌ་ ཝོཌརཌ་ཌ ༼ སྤྱི་ལོ་༡༩༦༤ སྤྱི་ཟླ་༤ པའི་ཚེས་༦ ལུ་ སཱན་ཏ་བཱར་བ་ར་ ཀ་ལི་ཕོར་ནི་ཡ་ལུ་སྐྱེས་ ༽ འདི་ འདི་ ཨ་མི་རི་ཀ་གི་རོལ་དབྱངས་ཀྱི་འགོ་ཁྲིདཔ་དང་རྩོམ་བྲིས་པ་ཅིག་ཨིན་མས། ཝོཌརཌ་ཌ འདི་ཡང་ པ་ར་གུ་ཝའི ལུ་ མི་སྟོབས་ཀྱི་ལཱ་ཚུ་གི་དོན་ལུ་ ཡོངས་གྲགས་ཅན་ཅིག་ཨིན་མས། ཤེས་ཡོན་ ཌེ་བི་ཌ་ ཝོཌརཌ་ཌ འདི་ ནིའུ་ཡོག་ལུ་ The New School for Social Researchལུ་ ཤེས་ཡོན་སྦྱང་ནུག། རྩོམ་རིག་་ Kracht, C., & Woodard, Five Years (Hannover: Wehrhahn, 2011) Tenaglia, F., Momus—A Walking Interview (Milano: Noch, 2015) Allen, B., Pelican (London: Reaktion, 2019) Horzon, R., The White Book (Berlin: Suhrkamp, 2021) ཁུངས་གཏུག། འབྲེལ་མཐུད། ཌེ་བི་ཌ་ ཝོཌརཌ་ཌ ཌེ་བི་ཌ་ ཝོཌརཌ་ཌ (ཨིང་ལིཤ) ཚོགས་པའི་དཔེ་མཛོད་ཁང་ དྲ་ཚིག འཁྲབ་རྩེདཔ། མི་མང་
__label__dz ༄༅། །འགྲོ་ཕན་སྨོན་ལམ་བཞུགས་སོ།། ༄༅། །འགྲོ་ལ་ཕན་བདེ་འབྱུང་བའི་གཞི་གཅིག་པུ། །དཔལ་ལྡན་འབྲུག་པའི་བསྟན་པ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ། །ཕྱོགས་དུས་ཀུན་ཏུ་དར་ཞིང་རྒྱས་པ་དང་། །འགྲོ་ཀུན་ཐབས་མཁས་དེ་ཡིས་གྲོལ་གྱུར་ཅིག །ཡུལ་ལྗོངས་སྤྱི་དང་བྱེ་བྲག་འབྲུག་ཡུལ་འདིར། །མི་འཐུན་ཉེར་འཚེའི་མིང་ཡང་མི་གྲགས་ཤིང་། །དཔལ་ལྡན་བླ་མའི་སྐུ་ཚེ་བརྟན་པ་དང་། །དགེ་འདུན་སྡེ་རྣམས་དར་ཞིང་རྒྱས་པར་ཤོག །ས་སྐྱོང་མི་དབང་ཆབ་སྲིད་བརྟན་པ་དང་། །འབངས་རྣམས་བདེ་སྐྱིད་དཔལ་ལ་སྤྱོད་པར་ཤོག །འདི་ཡི་དགེ་བས་བསྟན་པ་རྒྱས་པའི་གེགས། །བདུད་རིགས་རྣམས་དང་དེ་ཡིས་ཡིད་བསྐྱོད་པས། །ལོག་པར་བསྒྲུབ་པ་མཐའ་དག་ཚར་བཅད་ནས། །བསྟན་པའི་རྒྱལ་མཚན་ཕྱོགས་བཅུར་བསྒྲེང་བར་ཤོག །གནས་འདིར་དཔལ་འབྱོར་བྱིན་རླབས་མི་ཉམས་ཤིང་། །བསམ་སྦྱོར་ངན་པའི་གདུག་རྩུབ་ཞི་བ་དང་། །བསླབ་གསུམ་རྣམ་དག་བསྟན་པ་གཅེས་འཛིན་པའི། །དགེ་འདུན་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་གང་བའི་བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཤོག །གསེར་ཁང་སྤྲུལ་སྐུས་མཛད་པའོ།།
__label__dz དངུལ་ཀྲམ་འདི་འབྲུག་གི་ཤོག་དངུལ་གྱི་མིང་ཨིན། དངུལ་ཀྲམ་༡་གི་ཕྱེད་ཏམ་༡༠༠་ཅི་ཨིན། འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་གཞུང་དངུལ་ལས་དབང་འཛིན་གྱི་ཐ་ལ་དང་དངུལ་ཀྲམ་ཛོ་ཀྲུན་ཚུ་བདག་འཛིན་སྦེཝ་ཨིན། འབྲུག་གི་དངུལ་ཀྲམ་འདི་རྒྱ་གར་གི་རུ་པི་དང་དངུལ་ཤུག་འདྲན་འདྲ་ཡོདཔ་ཨིན།
__label__dz ༉ ལྷ་ཤིང་ལྗོན་པའི་རྩེ་ནས།། གསུང་གི་ཁུ་བྱུག་སྔོན་མོ།། སྐྱེད་ཚལ་མཛེས་པའི་རྒྱན་ཆ།། གསུང་སྙན་མཆོད་པ་ཕུལ་ཤོག། ཆུ་རྫིང་གྲུ་བཞི་ནང་ལས།། ཡིད་འོང་གསེར་མིག་ཉ་མོ།། ཉམས་ཀྱི་རྩེ་འཇོ་ངོམས་པ།། དགའ་སྐྱིད་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ཞུ་འོ།། ཁང་བཟང་ཁྲ་མོའི་ནང་དུ།། སྐྱེས་པའི་དྲིན་ཅན་ཡབ་ཡུམ།། བྱམས་སྐྱོང་བརྩེ་གདུང་ཆེ་བ།། བཀའ་དྲིན་ཤིན་ཏུ་ཆེ་སོང་།། ལས་དང་སྨོན་ལམ་མཐུན་པའི།། བརྩེ་གདུང་སྙིང་གི་གྲོགས་པོ།། དམ་ཚིག་དར་མདུད་དཀར་པོ།། མ་ལྷོད་ཕྱག་ལ་བཞེས་གནང་།། གསེར་གཤོག་སྤང་གི་དབུས་ན།། སྟག་ཤར་གཞོན་པའི་མདའ་མོ།། སྣ་ཚོགས་དར་གྱིས་བརྒྱན་ནས།། འབའ་མོ་བསྐོར་བ་ལེགས་སོ།། ཡིད་འོང་སྨན་ཆུང་བུ་མོ།། ལྷང་ལྷང་གླུ་གར་བསྒྱུར་ནས།། ཇ་ཆང་མཚོ་ལྟར་འཁྱིལ་བའི།། རྟེན་འབྲེལ་ལེགས་པར་ཞུའོ།། །།
__label__dz ༄༅། །ཕྱོགས་བཅུ་མུན་སེལ་བསྡུས་པ་བཞུགས་སོ།། ༄༅། །ཕྱོགས་བཅུའི་འགལ་རྐྱེན་ཐམས་ཅད་ཞི་བ་དང་། །ཕྱོགས་བཅུའི་མཐུན་རྐྱེན་མ་ལུས་འགྲུབ་པའི་ཕྱིར། །ཕྱོགས་བཅུའི་རྒྱལ་བ་སྲས་བཅས་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ། །ཕྱོགས་བཅུའི་འདོད་དོན་འགྲུབ་པར་བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབས། །སྟེང་འོག་ཕྱོགས་མཚམས་བཞུགས་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས་ལ། །ཕྱག་འཚལ་སྐྱབས་མཆིས་བདག་ཅག་གར་འགྲོ་ཡང་། །དགྲ་ཇག་ཆོམ་རྐུན་མེ་ཆུ་གཅན་གཟན་སོགས། །འཇིགས་པ་ཀུན་སྐྱོབས་བསམ་དོན་མྱུར་འགྲུབ་ཤོག །ཨོཾ་མུ་ནེ་མུ་ནེ་མ་ཧཱ་མུ་ནེ་ཡེ་སྭཱཧཱ༔ ཨོ་དྷུ་རུ་དྷུ་རུ་སྭཱཧཱ༔ ཨོཾ་ཛ་ཡ་ཛ་ཡ་སྭཱཧཱ༔ ཨོཾ་མ་ཧཱ་བི་ཛ་ཡ་སྭཱཧཱ༔ ཨོཾ་མ་མ་སརྦ་ཨརྛ་སིདྡྷི་ཡེ་སྭཱཧཱ༔ ཨོ་མངྒ་ལཾ་སྭ་སྟི་སིདྡྷི་སཱཧཱ༔
__label__dz བཀྲ་ཤིས་གཡང་རྩེ་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག ལུ། འབྲུག་ཡུ ཁོར་ཡུག མགྲོན་ཁང་། ལོ་རྒྱུས། ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ། ཡུལ་ཚོ། མིང་ཐོགས་ཚུལ། དུས་ཆེན། མི་སྣ། པར་རིས་བར་འཁྱམས། ྄ུཅཀཡོུ ཟིན་ཐོ་འམ་དཔྱད་གཞི། དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཀར་ཆག། ད་དུང་གཟིགས། ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས་དྲ་མཐུད། བཀྲིས་གཡང་རྩེ་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་འཛུལ་སྒོ་ བཀྲིས་གཡང་རྩེ་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག
__label__dz ༉ དག་པ་དབུས་གཙང་ཕྱོགས་ལ་བལྟས་ཙ་ན།། མ་དག་མཐའ་མེད་ཕྱོགས་ལ་ཞེན་པ་ལོག། ཤོག་ལེགས་མོ་ཤོག། ཤོག་ལེགས་ཡ།། ཡར་ཡར་བྱང་ཐང་པདྨའི་གྲོང་ཡུལ་ན།། གུར་ལ་གངས་རི་དཀར་པོ་སྤུབས་པ་འདྲ།། ཤོག་ལེགས་མོ་ཤོག། ཤོག་ལེགས་ཡ།། ཕྱག་ལ་གཡས་པ་ཤེས་རབ་རལ་གྲི་བསྣམས།། དམ་ཉམས་རྒྱ་འདྲེའི་མགོ་ལ་ཆེམས་སེ་ཆེམས།། ཤོག་ལེགས་མོ་ཤོག། ཤོག་ལེགས་ཡ།། ཕྱག་ལ་གཡོན་པ་སྦྲུལ་གྱི་ཞགས་པ་འཛིན།། དམ་ཉམས་རྒྱ་འདྲེའི་སྐེ་ལ་བཅིངས་སེ་བཅིངས།། ཤོག་ལེགས་མོ་ཤོག། ཤོག་ལེགས་ཡ།། ཁམས་པ་ཨུ་ཚུགས་ཅན་གྱི་ཕོ་རྒོད་རྣམས།། ལུས་ལ་དཔའ་བོའི་གོ་ཁྲབ་སི་ལི་ལི།། ཤོག་ལེགས་མོ་ཤོག། ཤོག་ལེགས་ཡ།། འོག་ལ་ཅང་ཤེས་རྟ་ཕོ་འཁྱུགས་སེ་འཁྱུགས།། གེ་སར་དགྲ་བོའི་བར་ན་ཁེངས་སེ་ཁེངས།། ཤོག་ལེགས་མོ་ཤོག། ཤོག་ལེགས་ཡ།། ལྷ་དང་སྲུང་མའི་སྐྱབས་རྟེན་བཟང་སེ་བཟང་།། སངས་རྒྱས་བསྟན་པ་དགུང་ལས་ལོས་ཀྱང་མཐོ།། ཤོག་ལེགས་མོ་ཤོག། ཤོག་ལེགས་ཡ།། མངའ་བདག་རྒྱལ་པོའི་སྐུ་ཚེ་ཞབས་པད་བརྟན།། བསྟན་པ་ཡུན་རིང་གནས་པའི་ཕུན་སུམ་ཚོགས།། ཤོག་ལེགས་མོ་ཤོག། ཤོག་ལེགས་ཡ།། །།
__label__dz ཀལཡདེ འནད ཆིལིས (འལསོ གནོཆན འས ཊམེ ཀལཡདེ འནད ཆིལིས སམོཆ ིན ཏམེ ུནིཏེད སཏའཏེས) ིས འན འ྅ེརིཀའན པརིཏིསམ ཀམིནེསེ ༣ད འནི྅འཏེད སེརིེས ཏམའཏ ཆའས ཀརེའཏེད པཡ Andrew Wilson བོར Nickelodeon.com འནད ཡོུཏུཔེཇ འནད ིཏ བིརསཏ དེཔུཏ དེཔུཏ ོན Nickelodeon.com བརོ྅ 2017.1.31 - 2017.2.20. ༙ཏ ིས ཽསཏ ཀོ྅྅ོནལཡ གནོཆན ིན ཱསིའཐ ིཏ ིས འལསོ ྅ོསཏ གནོཆན ིན ཀྵམིནའཐ ེསཕེཀིའལལཡ ཊིཔེཏ འནད ༗འསཏ ྆མུཏའན. ིཏ ལའཏེར ྰདེ ིཏས རེཁིཁའལ ོན YouTube ོན 2017.3.16 Cartoon
__label__dz དང་པོ་བྱི་བ། (鼠) རང་གཤས་འཇམ་ལ་དྲང་མོ་ཡིན། རིག་པ་གྲུས་རཅྱད་ཚྱོར་སྦང་གིས་ཐག་གཅོད་བྱེད། ནུས་པ་ཆ། བླ་རྩ་གཉིས་ཡད་པས་དཔལ་འབྱོར་སོགས་ག གཉས་པ་ླང་། (牛) རང་གཤས་བཟང་། སྐད་ཆ་མང་པ་མ་བཤད།གཞུང་དྲང་ཞང་རྫུན་མ་བཤད། བརྩན་འགྲུས་དང་སྡུག་རུས་ཆ། རང་བཞན་ཧ་ཅང་བརྟན་པ་ཡན།མ་གཞན་པར་འག་འཇན་ྒྱད་ྒུཏ་དགའ། ཁམ་བདག་ གསུམ་པ་སྟ། (虎) རང་གཤས་དྲང་བདན་དང་གནས་ལུགས་གཙ་བར་བྱད། ཕྱཚུལ་ནས་རྩུབ་ཀྱང་བསམ་པ་བཟང་། བུད་མེད་ཡིན་ན་དེ་ལས་ལྡོག་སྟེ་གསར་གཏོད་ཀྱི་ནུས་པ་ལྡན། སྤྲོ་སྣང་ཅན་ཞིག་ཡིན། མི་གཞན་གྱས་རང་དགར་བར་དུང་སྟར། ཁྱ་བ་ཐམས་ཅད་འགྲུབ། འགྱུལ་སྐྱུད་
__label__dz ༄༅། །གུ་རུ་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་ཚིག་བདུན་གསོལ་འདེབས་བཞུགས་སོ།། ༈ ཧཱུྃ༔ ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཡུལ་གྱི་ནུབ་བྱང་མཚམས༔ པདྨ་གེ་སར་སྡོང་པོ་ལ༔ ཡ་མཚན་མཆོག་གི་དངོས་གྲུབ་བརྙེས༔ པདྨ་འབྱུང་གནས་ཞེས་སུ་གྲགས༔ འཁོར་དུ་མཁའ་འགྲོ་མང་པོས་བསྐོར༔ ཁྱེད་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་བདག་བསྒྲུབ་ཀྱི༔ བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབ་ཕྱིར་གཤེགས་སུ་གསོལ༔ གུ་རུ་པདྨ་སིདྡྷི་ཧཱུྃ༔
__label__dz ༉ འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་རྫོང་འདི་ རྗོང་དང་ནང་པའི་ལྷ་ཁང་གཉིས་ཆ་ར་ཨིན། ད་ལྟོ་འབད་བ་ཅིན་གྱང་ཁོག་ཡོདཔ་དང་ སྤོ་རོ་རྫོང་ཁག་གི་སྟོད་ཕྱོགས་ཁ་ཐུག་ལུ་ཆགས་ཏེ་ཡོདཔ་ཨིན། རྫོང་འདི་ བསྟན་འཛིན་འབྲུག་སྒྲ་གིས་སྤྱི་ལོ་༡༦༤༩ ལུ་ཞབས་དྲུང་ངག་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་གྱི་བཀའ་སློབ་དང་འཁྲིལ་ཏེ་ བོད་ལས་དམག་གི་རྒྱལ་ཁ་འཐོབ་པའི་བརྩི་སྲུང་ཞུ་ནིའི་དོན་ལུ་བཞེངས་ནུག། སྤྱི༌ལོ༌༡༩༥༠ གྲངས༌འགོ་བཙུགས་ཁམས་ལུ་ འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་རྫོང་འདི་ ཡོངས་རྫོངས་མེ་མཆོད་བཞེས་ནིའི་འབད་ནུག། སྤྱི་ལོ་༢༠༡༦ ལུ་ མི་དབང་རྒྱལ་སྲས་སྐུ་འཁྲུངས་པའི་དུས་སྟོན་བརྩི་སྲུང་ཞུ་ནིའི་དོན་ལུ་དང་ གཞན་དུས་སྟོན་གཉིས་ སྤྱི་ལོ ༡༦༡༦ ལུ་ཞབས་དྲུང་ངག་དབང་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་འབྲུག་ལུ་ཕེབས་པའི་ལོ་དང་ གུ་རུ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་སྐུ་འཁྲུངས་པའི་ལོ་ བརྩི་སྲུང་ཞུ་ནིའི་དོན་ལུ་ བློན་ཚེ་རིང་སྟོབས་རྒྱས་ཀྱིས་ རྫོང་འདི་ཧེ་མ་བཟུམ་སྦེ་རང་ལོག་སྟེ་བཞེངས་ནིའི་ཟེར་གསལ་སྒྲགས་ནུག། གསལ་སྒྲགས་དང་ས་སླང་བརྟེན་འབྲེལ་འདི་ཡང་ རྒྱལ་སྲས་སྐུ་འཁྲུངས་ཏེ་ཉིནམ་གཅིག་གི་རྒྱབ་ལས་འབད་ནུག། ཁུངས་གཏུག། Wikipedia contributors. (2021). Drukgyal_Dzong. In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved from་https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drukgyal_Dzong སྤ་རོ་རྫོང་ཁག རྫོང
__label__dz ཀྲོང་གསར་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག འབྲུག་ཡུལ་ ཀྲོང་གསར་ ཁོར་ཡུག མགྲོན་ཁང་། ལོ་རྒྱུས། འབྲུག་པ་ནི་བོད་རིགས་ཀྱི་མི་རྒྱུད་རེད། ལྗོངས་རྒྱུ། ཡུལ་ཚོ། མིང་ཐོགས་ཚུལ། དུས་ཆེན། མི་སྣ། སྟག་ཚ་བླ་རྒན། སྟག་ཕྲུག་ པར་རིས་བར་འཁྱམས། ཟིན་ཐོ་འམ་དཔྱད་གཞི། དཔྱད་གཞིའི་དཀར་ཆག། ད་དུང་གཟིགས། ཕྱི་ཕྱོགས་དྲ་མཐུད། འབྲུག་གི་རྫོང་ཁག
__label__dz ག་ར་ལུ་མི་སྡེ་ནང་གི་ལམ་སྲོལ་བརྩིས་སྲུང་ཚུ་ནང་ལུ་བཀག་ཆ་ག་ནི་ཡང་མེད་པར་བཅའ་མར་གཏོགས་ཏེ་ ལུགས་སྲོལ་ལུ་ སྤྲོ་བ་འཕེལ་ནི་དང་། ཚན་རིག་གོང་འཕེལ་གྱི་གྲུབ་འབྲས་ཚུ་དང་ དེའི་ཁེ་ཕན་ཚུ་སྤྱོད་ནིའི་དལ་དབང་ཡོད།
__label__dz ལོ་ན་ཚོད་རན་པའི་ཕོ་མོ་ག་ར་ཨིན་རུང་ མི་རིགས་དང་མི་ཁུངས་ ཡངན་ ཆོས་ལུགས་ག་ཅི་ར་ཨིན་རུང་ དེ་ཚུ་ལུ་གཉེན་རྐྱབ་ནི་དང་བཟའ་ཚང་སྐྱོང་ནིའི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོད། གཉེན་སྦྱོར་ཀྱི་སྐབས་ལུ་གཉེན་འབྲེལ་གྱི་ཐོབ་དབང་དང་ ཁ་བྲལ་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཚུ་འདྲ་མཉམ་སྦེ་ར་ཐོབ་དགོ།
__label__dz གལ་སྲིད་ཉེས་འགེལ་ཅིག་འབད་བའི་དུས་སྐབས་ལུ་ ཉེས་པ་འདི་ རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་དང་རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་ཉེས་འགེལ་ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་གྲངས་སུ་ཐོ་བཀོད་འབད་དེ་མེད་པ་ཅིན་ དེ་བཟུམ་འབད་མི་ག་ར་ཨིན་རུང་ ཉེས་འགེལ་ཁྲིམས་ཕོག་པའི་ཉེས་ཅན་གྱི་གྲངས་སུ་བརྩི་ནི་མི་འོངམ་མ་ཚད། ཉེས་པ་འདི་འབྱུང་བའི་དུས་སྐབས་ཀྱི་ཉེས་ཆད་ལས་མཐོ་བའི་ཉེས་བྱ་བཀལ་མི་ཆོག
__label__dz ག་ར་ལུ་རང་སོའི་བསམ་འཆར་སླབ་ནི་དང་མནོ་ཡོད་མི་ བཤད་ནིའི་དལ་དབང་ཡོད། དལ་དབང་དེའི་གྲངས་སུ་ གཞན་གྱི་བར་འཛུལ་མེད་པར་ རང་གི་བསམ་འཆར་མ་སླབ་པར་བཞག་ཆོགཔ་དང་། ས་མཚམས་དེ་ཟེརཝ་མེད་པར་ བརྡ་བརྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ཐོག་ལས་ བརྡ་དོན་འཚོལ་ནི་དང་ལེན་ནི། དེ་ལས་སྤེལ་ནི་ཚུ་འབད་ཆོག་པའི་ དལ་དབང་ཚུ་ཚུདཔ་ཨིན།
__label__dz འགྲོ་བ་མི་རིགས་ག་ར་ མི་སྡེའི་འཐུས་མི་གཅིག་ཨིནམ་ལས་ མི་སྡེ་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི་ཉེན་སྲུང་གི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོདཔ་མ་ཚད་ རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་འབད་བརྩོན་དང་རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་མཉམ་འབྲེལ་གྱི་ཐོག་ལས་ དེ་ལས་གཞན་ཡང་། ལས་ཚོགས་དང་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་ཐོན་ཁུངས་ཚུ་དང་ རང་སོའི་ངོ་སོ་གོང་འཕེལ་གྱི་དོན་ལུ་མེད་ཐབས་མེད་པར་ཁག་ཆེ་བའི་དཔལ་འབྱོར་དང་ལམ་སྲོལ་གྱི་དལ་དབང་ཚུ་ཐོབ་དགོ།
__label__dz ག་ར་ལུ་ ལཱ་གཡོག་འབད་ནིའི་དང་ ལཱ་གཡོག་གདམ་ཁ་རྐྱབ་ནིའི་དལ་དབང་། དེ་ལས་ ལེགས་ཆ་ཅན་གྱི་ལཱ་གཡོག་གི་གནས་སྟངས་དང་ ལཱ་གཡོག་མེད་པའི་དཀའ་ངལ་ལས་ཉེན་སྲུང་ཐོབ་དགོ་པའི་དབང་ཆ་ཡོད།
__label__dz ག་ར་ལུ་རང་གི་བློ་རིག་ལས་བརྟེན་ཏེ་ གྲུབ་ཡོད་པའི་ ཚན་རིག་དང་རྩོམ་རིག་ ཡངན་ ལག་རྩལ་ཐོན་དངོས་ཚུ་གི་སྙིང་དོན་དང་ རྒྱུ་ཆས་ཀྱི་དང་བ་ཚུ་གི་ཉེན་སྲུང་གི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོད།
__label__dz ག་ར་ལུ་ གསལ་བསྒྲགས་འདི་ནང་བཀོད་དེ་ཡོད་པའི་ཐོབ་དབང་དང་དལ་དབང་ཚུ་ ཧྲིལ་པོར་ཐོབ་དགོ་པའི་སྐོར་ལས་ ཚུད་དེ་ཡོད་པའི་ མི་སྡེ་དང་རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་བཀའ་ཁྲིམས་ཚུ་གི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོད།
__label__dz དེ་ཡང་ འཛམ་གླིང་ནང་གི་ཞི་བདེ་དང་དྲང་ཁྲིམས། དེ་ལས་དལ་དབང་ཚུ་གི་གཞི་འགྱམ་གཙོ་བོ་དེ་ འགྲོ་བ་མིའི་རིགས་ག་ར་དང་མཉམ་ ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་ཏེ་ཡོད་པའི་བརྩི་མཐོང་དང་འདྲ་མཉམ། རང་དང་འབྲེལ་བ་མེད་པའི་དལ་དབང་ཚུ་ཨིན་པའི་ངོས་འཛིན་གྲུབ་ཨིན།
__label__dz བཟའ་ཚང་ཟེར་མི་འདི་ མི་སྡེ་ནང་གི་སྡེ་ཚན་གི་རང་བཞིན་དང་ མང་གཞི་བཟུམ་གཅིག་ཨིནམ་ལས་ དེ་ཚུ་ལུ་མི་སྡེ་དང་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་གཉིས་ཆ་རང་གིས་ར་ཉེན་སྲུང་འབད་དགོ་པའི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོད།
__label__dz མའི་གནས་སྐབས་དང་ཨ་ལུའི་གནས་སྐབས་འདི་གཉིས་ལུ་ དམིགས་བསལ་གྱི་བདག་འཛིན་དང་གྲོགས་རམ་གྱི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོད། གཉེན་སྦྱོར་ལུ་བརྟེན་ཏེ་སྐྱེས་བའི་ཨ་ལུ། ཡངན་ གཉེན་སྦྱོར་ཐོག་ལས་མེན་པར་སྐྱེ་བའི་ཨ་ལུ་ག་ཅི་ར་ཨིན་རུང་ དེ་གཉིས་ཆ་ར་ལུ་ མི་སྡེའི་ཉེན་སྲུང་གི་ཐོབ་དབང་འདྲ་མཉམ་ཡོད།
__label__dz འགྲོ་བ་མི་རིགས་ག་ར་ལུ་ གསལ་བསྒྲགས་འདི་ནང་འཁོད་དེ་ཡོད་པའི་ ཐོབ་དབང་དང་དལ་དབང་ཚུ་ འགྲོ་བ་མིའི་རིགས་ཀྱི་དབྱེ་བ་དང་། ཤ་བཀྱག མཚན་རྟགས། ཁ་སྐད། ཆོས་ལུགས། སྲིད་དོན་དང་གཞན་གནད་དོན། མི་ཁུངས། རྒྱུ་དངོས། སྐྱེ་སའི་ཡུལ་དང་སྟོབས་གོ་ས་ལ་སོགས་པ་ག་ནི་ལུ་ཡང་དབྱེ་བ་མ་ཕྱེ་བར་ འདྲ་མཉམ་སྦེ་ཐོབ་དགོ། ལྷག་པར་དུ་ རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་ ཆབ་སྲིད་དང་། ས་ཁོངས། ཡངན་ རྒྱལ་སྤྱིའི་ནང་གི་གནས་རིམ་དང་། ཡངན་ རང་དབང་དང་བློ་གཏད་ཅན། ཡངན་ རང་དབང་གི་ཐོག་ལུ་སྐྱོང་གཞག་མེད་པའི་ས་ཁོངས། ཡངན་ རང་དབང་ལུ་ཚད་བཟུང་འབད་ཡོད་པའི་ས་ཁོངས་ག་སྟེ་གི་ མི་ར་ཨིན་རུང་ དེ་ཚུ་ཡང་ སོ་སོར་འབད་དབྱེ་བ་ཕྱེ་མི་ཆོག
__label__dz གསལ་བསྒྲགས་འདི་ནང་བཀོད་ཡོད་མི་གི་དོན་ཚན་ཚུ་ གསལ་བསྒྲགས་འདི་ནང་བཀོད་ཡོད་པའི་ ཐོབ་དབང་དང་དལ་དབང་གང་རུང་མེདཔ་གཏང་ནིའི་ལཱ་རིགས་ནང་འབྲེལ་གཏོགས་ ཡངན་ དངོས་སུ་འབད་ནིའི་དོན་ལུ་ རྒྱལ་ཁབ་དང་ སྡེ་ཚན་ ཡངན་ མི་ངོམ་གང་རུང་ལུ་འཇུགཔ་འབད་གོ་དོན་འགྲེལ་མི་ཆོག
__label__dz དེ་ཡང་འཐུས་མི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཚུ་གིས་ཡང་ འཛམ་གླིང་སྤྱི་ཚོགས་དང་གཅིག་ཁར་ལགཔ་མཐུད་དེ་ འཛམ་གླིང་ནང་ལུ་གུས་བཀུར་ཡར་དྲག་གཏང་ནི་དང་། འགྲོ་བ་མིའི་ཐོབ་དབང་དང་གཞི་རྟེན་གྱི་དལ་དབང་ཚུ་གྲུབ་ནི་ལུ་ཁས་ལེན་འབད་དེ་ཡོད།
__label__dz འགྲོ་བ་མིའི་དབང་ཆ་གི་འཛམ་གླིང་གསལ་བསྒྲགས་འདི་ མི་དང་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ག་ར་གིས་གནས་ཚད་གཅིག་གི་ཐོག་ལས་གྲུབ་དགོཔ་མི་གཅིག་དང་། མི་ངོམ་རེ་རེ་བཞིན་དང་མི་སྡེའི་ལས་ཚོགས་ཚུ་གིས་ གསལ་བསྒྲགས་འདི་དུས་རྒྱུན་དུ་སེམས་ཁར་དྲན་ཏེ་ ཤེས་རིག་ཡོན་ཏན་གྱི་ཐོག་ལས་ ཐོབ་དབང་དང་དལ་དབང་ཚུ་ལུ་བསྐྱེད་དགོ་པའི་གུས་ཞབས་ཡར་དྲག་གཏང་ནི་དང་།རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་དང་རྒྱལ་སྤྱི་གིས་ འཛམ་གླིང་ཡོངས་དང་ འཐུས་མིའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་མི་ཚུ་དང་། རང་སོའི་མངའ་ཁོངས་ཀྱི་ས་ཁོངས་ཚུ་ནང་ཡོད་པའི་མི་ཚུ་ལས་ཡང་ ནུས་ཤུགས་ལྡན་པའི་ངོས་འཛིན་དང་མིག་ལྟ་ཚུ་ཐོབ་ཐབས་འབད་ནིའི་སྤྱིར་བཏང་གནས་ཚད་ཅིག་འབད་གསལ་བསྒྲགས་འབདཝ་ཨིན།
__label__dz རྩ་ཁྲིམས་ཆེན་མོ་དང་ ཡངན་ ཁྲིམས་གཞུང་གང་རུང་གིས་གནང་ཡོད་པའི་གཞི་རྟེན་ཐོབ་དབང་ལུ་གནོད་པའི་བྱ་སྤྱོད་རེ་བྱུང་ཚེ་ རྒྱལ་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་ལྕོགས་གྲུབ་ཅན་གྱི་ཁྲིམས་ཞིབ་ཚོགས་པའི་ཁ་ཐུག་ལས་ནུས་པ་དང་ལྡན་པའི་སེལ་ཐབས་འབད་དགོཔ་འདི་ག་ར་གི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཨིན།
__label__dz ག་ར་ལུ་ བཟའ་འཐུང་དང་གྱོན་ཆས། སྡོད་ཁྱིམ་དང་འཕྲོད་བསྟེན་བདག་འཛིན། དེ་ལས་དགོས་མཁོ་ལྡན་པའི་མི་སྡེ་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི་ཞབས་ཏོག ལཱ་གཡོག་མ་འཐོབ་པ་སྡོད་པ་དང་ན་ཚ་ཕོག་པའི་སྐབས། དེ་ལས་ཡན་ལག་ལུ་སྐྱོན་ཞུགས་པ། ཡུགས་ས་མོ་དང་ལོ་ན་ཚོད་རྒས་པའི་གནས་སྐབས་དང་། གཞན་ཡང་རང་ར་སོ་སོར་གྱིས་འབད་མ་ཚུགས་པའི་འཚོ་བའི་གནས་སྟངས་ལ་སོགས་པ་ཚུ་བརྩིས་ཏེ་ མི་ངོམ་རང་ར་སོ་སོ་དང་ རང་གི་བཟའ་ཚང་ཚུ་གི་གཟུགས་ཁམས་འཕྲོད་བསྟེན་དང་ བདེ་སྐྱིད་ལུ་མཁོ་བའི་ འོས་འཚམས་ལྡན་པའི་མི་ཚེའི་འཚོ་སྐྱོང་འཐོབ་དགོ་པའི་དལ་དབང་ཡོད།
__label__dz ལཱ་གཡོག་འབད་མི་ག་ར་ཨིན་རུང་དེ་ཚུ་ལུ་ཁོ་ར་དང་ཁོ་རའི་བཟའ་ཚང་ཚུ་ འགྲོ་བ་མིའི་བརྩི་མཐོང་དང་ལྡནམ་འབད་སྡོད་ཚུགས་པའི་དངུལ་ཕོགས་ཐོབ་དགོཔ་པའི་ དབང་ཆ་ཡོདཔ་མ་ཚད་ གལ་ཆེ་བ་ཅིན་ མི་སྡེའི་ཉེན་སྲུང་གཞན་མི་ཚུ་ཡང་བྱིན་དགོ།
__label__dz ཤེས་ཡོན་དེ་གཙོ་བོ་འགྲོ་བ་མིའི་ཁྱད་ཆོས་ཆ་ཚང་གོང་འཕེལ་གཏང་ཚུགསཔ་ཅིག་དང་། འགྲོ་བ་མིའི་ཐོབ་དབང་དང་གཞི་རྟེན་དལ་དབང་ལུ་ གུས་བཀུར་བསྐྱེད་དགོ་པའི་མནོ་ལུགས་གོང་འཕེལ་གཏང་ཚུགསཔ་ཅིག་ལུ་དམིགས་གཏད་བསྐྱེད་དགོ། ཤེས་ཡོན་དེ་གིས་ རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ག་ར་དང་མི་རིགས་ཡངན་ཆོས་ལུགས་སོ་སོའི་སྡེ། ལྷག་པར་དུ་འཛམ་གླིང་སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་ཞི་བདེ་ཉམས་སྲུང་གི་ལཱ་རིགས་ཚུ་ནང་ ངོས་ལེན་དང་ བཟོད་བསྲན། མཛའ་བཤེས་མཐུན་འབྲེལ་ཚུ་ རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ག་ར་དང་ མི་རིགས་ཚུ་གི་བར་ན་ཡར་དྲག་གོང་འཕེལ་གཏང་དགོ།
__label__dz མི་ངོམ་གང་རུང་གི་ཐོབ་དབང་དང་འགན་འཁྲི། དེ་ལས་ དེ་ལུ་བཀལ་ཡོད་པའི་ཁྲིམས་འགལ་གྱི་ཉེས་འཛུགས་ཚུ་ དྲང་བདེན་ཐག་བཅད་འབད་ནིའི་དོན་ལུ་ རང་དབང་ཅན་དང་ཡངན་ ཉེ་རིང་ལས་འདས་པའི་ ཁྲིམས་ཞིབ་ཚོགས་པ་གཅིག་གིས་འབད་དགོ་པའི་ཐོབ་དབང་མི་ངོམ་ག་ར་ལུ་ཡོད།
__label__dz ག་ར་ལུ་མནོ་བསམ་གཏང་ནི་དང་རྣམ་རིག་སྟོན་ནི། དེ་ལས་ཆོས་ལུགས་གདམ་ཁའི་ནང་རང་སོའི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོད། ཐོབ་དབང་དེ་གི་གྲངས་སུ་ ཆོས་ལུགས་ཡངན་ཡིད་ཆེས་སོར་ནི། རང་རྐྱང་ཡངན་མི་སྡེ་དང་། མི་མང་ཡངན་རང་རྐྱང་འབད་དེ་ སློབ་སྦྱོང་དང་སྦྱང་བ་འབད་ཆོག
__label__dz འགྲོ་བ་མི་ཚུ་ག་ར་དལ་དབང་གི་ཐོག་ལས་སྐྱེས་ཏེ་ཡོདཔ་ལས་ ག་ར་ལུ་བརྩི་མཐོང་དང་ཐོབ་དབང་འདྲ་མཉམ་སྦེ་ཡོད། མི་ཚུ་ག་ར་སྨྲ་ཤེས་དོན་གོ་བའི་མཚན་ཉིད་དང་ལྡནམ་ལས་ ག་ར་གིས་ལཱ་ག་ཅི་ར་འབད་རུང་ གཅིག་གིས་གཅིག་ལུ་སྤུན་ཆའི་འདུ་ཤེས་བསྐྱེད་ཐོག་ལས་ལཱ་འབད་དགོ།
__label__dz མི་མང་ཁྲིམས་དཔྱད་ཀྱི་ནང་ལུ་ མི་ངོམ་ག་ར་ཨིན་རུང་ རང་སོའི་བདེན་ཁུངས་བཟང་ནིའི་གོ་སྐབས་སྤྲོད་དེ་ཡོད་མི་དང་འཁྲིལ་ཏེ་ ཉེས་པ་ཡོདཔ་འབད་མ་ཐོན་རིང་ ཉེས་འགེལ་ཁྲིམས་བཤེར་འབད་དེ་ཡོད་རུང་ དེ་ལུ་ཉེས་པ་མེདཔ་འབད་ བརྩི་ཆོག་པའི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོད།
__label__dz ག་ར་ལུ་ཤེས་ཡོན་སྦྱོང་ནིའི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོདཔ་མ་ཚད་ གཞི་རིམཤེས་ཡོན་འདི་རིན་མེད་སྟོང་པར་ཐོབ་དགོཔ་དང་ དེ་བཞིན་གཞི་རིམ་སློབ་སྦྱོང་འདི་ ག་ར་ལུ་ཨིན་ཅི་མིན་ཅི་ཐོབ་དགོ། སྤྱིར་བཏང་ལུ་ འཕྲུལ་རིག་དང་ཁྱད་རིག་གི་ཤེས་ཡོན་གོ་སྐབས་ཡོདཔ་བཟོ་དགོཔ་དང་། ཆེ་རིམ་ཤེས་ཡོན་གི་གོ་སྐབས་འདི་རང་སོའི་གཟེངས་ཐོན་དང་འཁྲིལ་ཏེ་ག་ར་ལུ་འཐོབ་ཚུགསཔ་སྦེ་དགོ།
__label__dz དེ་ཡང་ འཛམ་གླིང་སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་འཐུས་མི་ཨིན་པའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་མི་ཚུ་གིས་ སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་བཀའ་ཁྲིམས་ནང་ལུ་ འགྲོ་བ་མིའི་དལ་དབང་གི་གཞི་རྩ། འགྲོ་བ་མིའི་ངོས་འཛིན་དང་རིན་ཐང་། ཕོ་མོ་འདྲ་མཉམ་གྱི་ཐོབ་དབང་། དེ་ལས་ རྒྱ་ཆེའི་དལ་དབང་གི་ཐོག་ལས་མི་སྡེ་ཡར་དྲག་གཏང་ནི་དང་ སྤུས་ཚད་ལྡན་པའི་མི་ཚེ་ཡར་དྲག་གཏང་དགོཔ་འབད་ཚུད་དེ་ཡོད།
__label__dz དེ་ཡང་ ག་དེམ་གཅིག་འབད་ འགྲོ་བ་མི་ཚུ་གིས་ དབང་སྐྱོང་དང་དབང་གནོན་ལས་བཟློག་ཐབས་ལུ་ མཐའ་མཇུག་གི་ཐབས་ཤེས་བཟུམ་ཅིག་འབད་ ངོ་བརྒལ་འབད་དགོཔ་མེདཔ་སྦེ་བཞག་དགོ་པ་ཅིན་ འགྲོ་བ་མིའི་དབང་ཆ་དེ་ ཁྲིམས་གྱིས་ཉེན་སྲུང་འབད་དགོཔ་ ག་ནི་ལས་ཁག་ཆེ།
__label__dz དེ་ཡང་ རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཚུ་གི་བར་ན་མཐུན་འབྲེལ་ཡར་དྲག་དང་གོང་འཕེལ་གཏང་དགོཔ་དེ་ཡང་ག་ནི་ལས་ཁག་ཆེ།
__label__dz འགྲོ་བ་མི་ག་ར་ཨིན་རུང་ བྲན་གཡོག་འབད་བཞག་མ་ཆོགཔ་དང་།བྲན་གཡོག་རིན་ལུགས་འདི་དང་ བྲན་གཡོག་ཚོང་འབྲེལ་གྱི་རིགས་ག་ཅི་ར་ཨིན་རུང་བཀག་དམ་འབད་དགོ།
__label__dz མི་ག་ར་ལུ་རང་སོའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ཀྱི་གཞུང་སྐྱོང་ནི་ནང་ལུ་ཐད་ཀར་དུ་ཡངན་ དལ་དབང་གི་ཐོག་ལས་གདམ་འཐུ་འབད་བའི་འཐུས་མི་ངོ་ཚབ་བརྒྱུད་དེ་ བཅའ་མར་གཏོགས་ཆོག
__label__dz ཁྲིམས་ཀྱི་འདུན་ས་ག་སྟེ་འབད་རུང་ ག་ར་ལུ་ འགྲོ་བ་མི་ཨིན་པའི་ངོས་འཛིན་གྱི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོད།
__label__dz མི་ངོམ་ག་ར་ལུ་ སྡུག་སྦྱོང་ལས་ཟུར་ཐབས་ལུ་ རྒྱལ་ཁབ་གཞན་ཁར་སྐྱབས་སྦྱིན་ལེན་ཏེ་སྡོད་ཆོག་པའི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོད།
__label__dz མི་ག་ར་ལུ་ རང་སོའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ནང་མི་མང་ཞབས་ཏོག་འདྲ་མཉམ་ཐོབ་དགོ་པའི་དལ་དབང་ཡོད།
__label__dz ག་ལུ་ཡང་ཚོགས་པ་ཅིག་ནང་འཛུལ་དགོ་པའི་ཐབས་མེད་བྱ་བ་བཙུགས་མི་ཆོག
__label__dz འགྲོ་བ་མི་ག་ར་ལུ་མི་ཚེའི་དལ་དབང་དང་རང་དབང་། དེ་ལས་ཉེན་སྲུང་གི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོད།
__label__dz ག་ལུ་ཡང་ངེས་པ་མེད་པར་རང་སོའི་མི་ཁུངས་ཐོབ་དབང་མེདཔ་བཟོ་མ་ཆོགཔ་མ་ཚད་མི་ཁུངས་སོར་ནིའི་ཐོབ་དབང་མེདཔ་བཟོ་མི་ཆོག
__label__dz དེ་ཡང་ ཐོབ་དབང་དང་དལ་དབང་དེ་དང་འབྲེལ་བའི་ སྤྱིར་བཏང་གོ་བ་ལེན་དགོཔ་འདི་ དེ་ནང་འཁོད་དེ་ཡོད་པའི་ཁས་བླངས་ཚུ་ག་ར་འགྲུབ་ཚུགསཔ་འབད་དགོ་མི་དེ་ཨིན།
__label__dz མི་ངོམ་ག་ར་ལུ་ རྒྱལ་ཁབ་རེ་རེ་བཞིན་གྱི་ས་མཚམས་ནང་འཁོད་ལུ་ ག་སྟེ་འགྱོ་རུང་འགྱོ་ཆོགཔ་དང་། ག་སྟེ་གཞི་བཅའ་རུང་བཅའ་ཆོག་པའི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོད།
__label__dz ག་ར་ལུ་ རང་དབང་གི་ཐོག་ལས་ཕོཝ་རྒྱགས་སའི་མི་སྡེ་འདི་ནང་ འབད་དགོ་པའི་རིགས་ཚུ་གི་ འགན་ཁུར་ཕོག
__label__dz ག་ར་ལུ་ རང་སོའི་ཁེ་ཕན་ཚུ་ཉེན་སྲུང་གི་དོན་ལུ་ ཚོང་འབྲེལ་པའི་སྐྱིད་སྡུག་ཚོགས་པ་བཟོ་ནི་དང་། བཟོ་སྟེ་ཡོད་མི་ཚུ་ནང་ལུ་འཛུལ་ནིའི་དབང་ཆ་ཡོད།
__label__dz ཁྲིམས་དང་མ་མཐུན་པར་འཛིན་བཟུང་འབད་ནི་དང་། དོ་དམ་འོག་ལུ་བཙུགས་ནི། ཡངན་ མཐར་བཤུད་གཏང་ནི་སོགས་ག་ལུ་ཡང་འབད་མི་ཆོག
__label__dz ཐོབ་དབང་དང་དལ་དབང་དེ་ཚུ་ག་ར་ ག་ཅི་གི་ཐད་ལས་ར་ཨིན་རུང་ འཛམ་གླིང་སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་དགོས་དོན་དང་གཞི་རྩ་ལས་བརྒལ་བའི་ཐོག་ལས་ལག་ལེན་འཐབ་མི་ཆོག
__label__dz མི་ངོམ་ག་ར་ལུ་ རང་རྐྱང་ ཡངན་ སྡེ་ཚན་ནང་ལུ་ རྒྱུ་དངོས་བདག་དབང་འབད་ནིའི་རང་དབང་ཡོད།
__label__dz ག་ར་གིས་ཡང་ རང་སོའི་རྒྱུ་དངོས་ཐོབ་དབང་ལས་ཤེས་ཅི་མཐོང་ཅི་བཀག་མི་ཆོག
__label__dz མི་ངོམ་ག་ར་ཨིན་རུང་ རང་སོའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་བརྩིས་ཏེ་ རྒྱལ་ཁབ་གཞན་ག་ར་ཨིན་རུང་བཞག་སྟེ་འགྱོ་ཆོག་ནི་དང་། སླར་ལོག་རང་སོའི་རྒྱལ་ཁབ་ནང་ལུ་འོང་ཆོག་པའི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོད།
__label__dz འཛམ་གླིང་སྤྱི་ཚོགས་ཡོངས་ཁྱབ་ཞལ་འཛོམས་ནང་ལས།
__label__dz ག་ར་ལུ་མི་ཁུངས་ཀྱི་ཐོབ་དབང་ཡོད།
__label__yo Adebáyò Adéfaratì (February 14, 1931 – March 29 2007) je oloselu ara orile-ede Naijiria ati Gómínà Ìpínlẹ̀ Òndó tele. Adefarati kú ní ojokandinlogbòn osù kéta odún 2007. Itokasi Àwọn Gómìnà Ìpínlẹ̀ Òndó
__label__yo Nozizwe Madlala-Routledge (Pronunciation: / nɔːziːzwɛ / / ʃɑːlət // mɑːdθlæθlɑː / - / raʊtlɛdʒ /) (bi ni ojo ookan dilaadota ninu osu kefa odun 1952)ni South African oloselu ti o je guusu afrika igbakeji iranse ti olugbeja lati osu kerin ni odun 2004 ati Igbakeji Minisita Ilera lati ojo kejo osu kejo odun 2007.Aare Thabo Mbeki jọwọ rẹ lati Minisita ni ojo kejo osu kejo 2007,lẹhin eyi ti o muduro rẹ ipa bi a egbe ti asofin nsoju awọn asofin oduro fun African National Congress.Ni ojo kaarun leloogun ninu osu kesan odi igbakeji agboroso ni National Assembly, sìn ni wipe agbara titi fiwesile lara awon Asofin ni ibere osu kaarun ni odun 2009.Owa lara South African Community lati 1984. Madlala-Routledge gbajumo fun iranlowo ikojasi Arun Kogbogun AIDS ni Guusi Afrika,opolopo eniyan ti ni ija ijoba kiko nipa lile ajakale naa. Otun je alatako lilo ogun miran fun aisan HIV ropo imo awon ona. Laipe Madlala-Routledge,se eleto agba ni Inyathelo. The South African Institute fun ite siwaju titi di osu keta ninu odun 2015 ti o fi ibe si ile nitori isoro pelu
__label__yo Étò Ìkànìyàn ni ìgbésẹ̀ kan tí a fi ń ṣe àkọsílẹ̀ iye ènìyàn tí wọ́n ń gbé ní ìletò, Ìlú Ìpínlẹ̀ tabí orílẹ̀-èdè kan nípa kíka àwọn ènìyàn ní orí-ò-jorí ní ojúlé sí ojúlé. Gẹ́gẹ́ bí àjọ àgbáyé ṣe làá kalẹ̀, étò ìkànìyàn gbọ́dọ̀ ma wáyé ní orílẹ̀-èdè kọ̀ọ̀kan láàrín ọdún Mẹ́wàá síra wọn. Ohun tí étò ìkànìyàn gbọ́dọ̀ kó sínú Étò ìkànìyàn gbọ́dọ̀ ṣàfihàn àkọsílẹ̀ iye ọkùnrin, obìnrin, ọmọdé àti àgbà pẹ̀lú iye ọjọ́ orí wọn lásìkò ìkànìyàn. Bákan náà, ó gbọ̀dọ̀ ṣe àkọsílẹ̀ iye ilé, ati iye ìdílé tí ó wà nínú ìlìlú tàbí ìletò tí ó wà láàrín Ìpínlẹ̀ àti orílẹ̀-èdè kọ̀ọ̀kan. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo Ewé jẹ́ àkójọ pọ̀ orúkọ fún àwọn ẹtúntún igi oríṣríṣi tí a lè fojú rí. Ìrísí rẹ̀ Ewé jẹ́ ohun tí ó ma ń sába rí pẹlẹbẹ, ó ma ń ní ilà tẹ́ẹ́rẹ́ láàrin bí ìṣẹ̀dá igi kọ̀ọ̀kan bá ṣe rí ni ewé rẹ̀ ṣe ma ń falà sára. Ewé sábà m ń hù sí ara tabí orí igi lọ́pọ̀ ìgbà, èyí náà tún dá lé irúfẹ́ ìṣẹ̀dá igi kọ̀ọ̀kan. Híhù igi sára ewé ma ń bẹ̀rẹ̀ láti àárin méjì. Apapọ̀ àárin igi ati ewé orí igi ni ó di ẹ̀ka igi. Ewé ma ń dàgba sókè látàrí omi ati ìtanṣán Oòrùn (photosynthesis) tí ó bá tan si ni ó fi ń gbéra sókè. lọ́pọ̀ Ìgbà, gbogbo ewé kọ́ ló ma ń rí bákan náà, ọ̀pọ̀ ma ń dán lára,ọ̀pọ̀ sì ma ń hurun,ọ̀pọ̀ ma ń ní ẹ[[ẹ̀gún lára, nígbà tí ọ̀pọ̀ ma hani lọ́wọ́ . Ohun tí ó ma ń ṣokùn fà àwọ̀ olómi aró gírínì tí ewé ma ń ní ohun tí wọ́n pè ní kílórófì (chlorophyll). Èròjà yí ṣe.pàtàkì fún ìrú gọ́gọ́ ati ìdàgbàsókè ewé àti igi lápapọ̀, nítorí òun ni ó yíra padà sí óúnjẹ fún ewé ẹ́yìn tí ó bá ti gba ìtansán òrùn sára tán. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí Àwọn ọ̀gbìn
__label__yo Karim Abdel Gawad (ti a bi ni ọgbon'jọ oṣu Keje, ọdun 1991 ni Alexandria ) jẹ ￼￼agbabọọlu￼￼ elegede ti o ti ṣe aṣoju orilẹ-ede Egypt . O de ipo kinni iṣẹ-giga ti Agbaye 1 ni Oṣu Karun ọdun 2017. Ni Oṣu kọkanla ọdun 2016, o gba 2016 World Open Squash Championship ni Cairo ni orilẹ-ede Egipti nigbati o dujoko Ramy Ashour . O di ara orilẹ-ede Egipti kẹta lati gba asiwaju agbaye lẹhin Amr Shabana ati Ramy Ashour . World Open 1 akọle & 0 olusare-soke Qatar Classic : 1 ipari (akọle 1, olusare 0) Àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1991 Àwọn ènìyàn alààyè
__label__yo Aṣọ Àdìrẹ jẹ́ ọ̀kan pàtàkì lára àwọn aṣọ ìbílẹ̀ ilẹ̀ Yorùbá. Tọmọdé tàgbà ni ó ń wọ aṣọ àdìrẹ tí wọ́n ṣiṣẹ́ ọnà oríṣríṣi sí lára nílànà ìbílẹ̀, tí ó sì wà ní àwọ̀ oríṣríṣi sí. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí Àṣà Yorùbá
__label__yo Ibi Ajogunba naa jẹ ile ọfiisi alaja ẹ̀rìnlá kan ni opopona Alfred Rewane, ni ilu Ikoyi, eko ati ile akọkọ ti LEED ifọwọsi ni orilede Nigeria. Ile naa ni awọn ilẹ ipakà ẹ̀rìnlá ti iwon re je 15,736sqm ti aaye ọfiisi ati aaye awa oko wa pelu e. won ko tan ni ọjọ 15th ti osukeeji, odun 2016. Awọn ẹya alagbero pẹlu idinku 30-40% ni lilo agbara, gbigba iwọn ilọpo meji, awọn orule ti o daduro, awọn ilẹ ipakà ti o dide, kafe kan ati ile itaja kọfi, plaza gẹgẹbi awọn iwọn awo ilẹ ti o rọ lati 450sqm to 2,000sqm. Awọn itọkasi
__label__yo Frantz Fanon (July 20, 1925 – December 6, 1961) jẹ́ ọmọ orílẹ̀ èdè Faransé oníwọsàn ààrùn ọpọlọ, amoye, olujidide àti oǹkọ̀wé tí àwọn ìwé rẹ̀ dá lórí àwọn Ẹ̀kọ́ ìgbà eyin imusin, critical theory ati Marxism. Itokasi Àwọn ará Fránsì
__label__yo Anita Baker (ojoibi Oṣù Kínní 26, 1958; pipe: Àntà Békà) je akorin-olukorinsile R&B ati soul ara Amerika. Titi doni, Baker ti gba Ebun Grammy mejo, beesini o ni awo orin platinomu merin ati awo orin wura meji. Itokasi àwọn akọrin ará Amẹ́ríkà
__label__yo Andrew Michael Holness, ON, MP (born 22 July 1972) je oloselu ara Jamaika to je lowolowo Alakoso Agba ile Jamaika lati 3 March 2016, leyin idiboyan gbogbogboo 25 February 2016. Itokasi Àwọn Alákóso Àgbà ilẹ̀ Jamáíkà
__label__yo Agbègbè Ìjọba Ìbílẹ̀ Àríwá Afikpo jẹ́ ìjọba ìbílẹ̀ ní Ìpínlẹ̀ Ebonyi ní orílẹ̀-èdè Nàìjíríà. Olú agbègbè náà wà ní Ehugbo, Afikpo. Àwọn ìlú pàtàkì níbẹ̀ ni [Unwana]], Itim, Ohaisu, Nkpoghoro, Ugwuegu/Amaizu, Ozizza, Amasiri, Ibii/Akpoha. Èdè ìbílẹ̀ Igbo tí ó ń jẹ́ 'Ehugbo ni wọ́n máa ń sọ. Ìlú yìí kún fún àwọn àṣà Igbo tó jinná tí ó sì múnádóko àti àwọn ọdún ìbílẹ̀ bí i "ọdún iṣu tuntun" tí wọ̀n máa ń ṣe ní ìparí oṣù kẹjọ. Àwọn Èèyàn Gbajúmọ̀ ní agbègbè náà Akanu Ibiam Chris Abani Uche Azikiwe Priscilla Ekwere Eleje Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí Afikpo Ariwa
__label__yo Oluilu je ilu ti ijoba orile-ede kan fi se ibujoko. O tun le tumo si Ilu ti o Ba tobi ju lo, tabi ti o se pataki Ju lo Ni Agbegbe, Orile-Ede, Tabi Ipinle kankan. Fun Apere, Awon Olu Ile ti o se Pataki Julo Ni Aiye Je New York, Ni Orile Ede Amerika, ati London ni orile Ede awon Geesi. Ni Ile Erekusu{Continent} Africa , Ilu Eko Lagos Je Olu Ilu Iwo-Oorun Afrika, Beeni Nairobi ni Orile Ede Kenya ati Addis ababa ni Orile Ede Ityopiya, Je Olu Ile Ni Apa Ila-Oorun, Ni Guusu-Afrika, Ilu Johannesburg ni Orile Ede Guusu Africa Ni Olu Ilu-u Guusa-Afrika, ati Gbogbo Afrilka pelu, Nitori wipe Ilu Johannesbuurg Ni O Ni Idagbasoke ati Itesiwaju Julo Ni Eya Owo sise, Idanilaraya, Asa, Iseda Ohun elo, ati bee bee lo ni Afrika. Ni Ariwa Afrika, Ilu Casablanca ni Orile Ede Morocco, Cairo ni Ijybiti/Egypt, ati Algiers ni Algeria, Je Olu-Ilu ni ona tiwon. Jẹ́ọ́gráfì
__label__yo Valéry Marie René Georges Giscard d'Estaing (; ojoibi 2 February 1926) je oloselu ara Fransi to di Aare orile-ede Fransi lati 1974 titi di 1981. , o je ikan ninu Igbimo Onila-ibagbpo Fransi. Itokasi Àwọn Ààrẹ ilẹ̀ Fránsì
__label__yo John Forbes Kerry (tí wọ́n bí ní ọjọ́ kọkànlá oṣù Kejìlá ọdún 1944) jẹ́ olóṣèlú ọmọ orílẹ̀ èdè Amẹ́ríkà òun ni akọ̀wé-àgbà alákòóso àwọn orílẹ̀-èdè lọ́wọ́́lọ́wọ́ lórílẹ̀ èdè náà tí wọ́n ń pè ní Alákòóso Ọ̀rọ̀ òkèrè Orílè-èdè Amẹ́ríkà68k. Ó ti fìgbà kan jẹ́ ọmọ ilé ìgbìmọ̀ aṣòfin-àgbà ti orílẹ̀ èdè náà Aṣòfin àgbà Asofin Orílẹ̀-èdè Amẹ́ríkà lati Massachusetts lọ́dún 1985 títí di ọdún 2013. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo Jo-Anne Reyneke (bíi ni ọjọ́ kejì oṣù kẹfà ọdún 1988) jẹ́ òṣèré ni orílẹ̀ èdè South Áfríkà tí ó gbajúmọ̀ fún ipá Pearl tí ó kó nínú eré Muvhando àti Prudence Oliphant nínú Rythm City. Ìbẹ̀rẹ̀ pẹ̀pẹ̀ ayé rẹ̀ Wọ́n bíi sì ìlú Vereeniging ni ilẹ̀ Guateng. Ó lọ sí ilé ẹ̀kọ́ Russell High School, níbẹ̀ sì ni ó ti nifẹ sí eré ṣíṣe. Ó tesiwaju sì ilẹ̀ ẹ̀kọ́ Movietech Film and Television School ní Durban níbi tí ó tí kẹ́kọ̀ọ́ orin kíkọ àti eré ṣíṣe. Iṣẹ́ Ó bẹ̀rẹ̀ iṣẹ́ ni ilẹ̀ iṣẹ́ The Playhouse Company, níbi tí ó tí kópa nínú eré The Game. Duma Ndlovu tí ó jé olùdarí ère Muvhango, fún Reyneke ni anfaani lati kópa nínú eré náà gẹ́gẹ́ bíi Pearl, èyí sì lo je ki Reyneke tí gbajúmọ̀. Ní ọdún 2013, ó fi eré Muvhango sílẹ̀, ó sì kópa nínú eré Intersexions àti Rhythm City ni ọdún náà. Ní ọdún 2019, ó kópa nínú eré ẹ̀fẹ̀ tí àkọ́rí rẹ̀ jẹ́ Black Tax. Ìgbéyàwó rẹ Ní ọdún 2008, Jo-Anne Reyneke ṣe ìgbéyàwó pẹ̀lú Thami Mngqolo. Wọn bíi ọmọ méjì tí orúkọ wọn jẹ́ Uvolwethu(bíi ní ọdún 2013) àti Lungelo(bíi ni ọdún 2015). Ní ọdún 2018, òhun àti ọkọ rẹ̀ pínyà. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo Articles with hCards Angela Olufunmilayo Emuwa jẹ́ adarí àwọn oníròyìn ní orílẹ̀-èdè Nàìjíríà. Ó jẹ́ alága Punch Media Foundation, tí àwọn ìgbìmọ̀ Punch Nigeria Limited yàn ní ọdún 2018, lẹ́yìn ikú ẹ̀gbọ́n rẹ̀ Gbadebowale Wayne Aboderin, ní ọjọ́ ọgbọ̀n oṣù karùn-ún ọdún 2018. Kí wọ́n tó yàn án sípò gẹ́gẹ́ bí alága, ó ti dara pọ̀ mọ́ ẹgbẹ́ náà ní ọdún 1994, ó sì ṣiṣẹ́ gẹ́gẹ́ bíi olùdarí tí kì í ṣe aláṣẹ ilé-iṣẹ́ náà. Àwọn ìtọ́kasí Àwọn oníròyìn ará Nàìjíríà Àwọn ènìyàn alààyè
__label__yo Fati Abubakar jẹ́ gbajúmọ̀ oníròyìn aláwòrán àti afohùn-fawòrán ṣàgbékalẹ̀ ètò. Ó jẹ́ ọmọbìnrin ọmọ bíbí Maiduguri, ní Ìpínlẹ̀ Borno orílẹ̀-èdè Nàìjíríà. Ni bí ti o gbajúmọ̀ dé, ìwé-ìròyìn The New York Times, CNN Africa, BBC àti Voice of America ṣe àtẹ̀jádé iṣẹ́ rẹ̀. Ìgbésí ayé àti iṣẹ́ rẹ̀ Fati jẹ ògidì ọmọ bíbí ìlú Maiduguri, ní Ìpínlẹ̀ Borno lórílẹ̀-èdè Nigeria. Gbajúmọ̀ àti ògidì nínú àwọn iṣẹ́ rẹ̀ ní àwọn gbankọ̀gbì àwọn ìwé ìròyìn òkè-òkun The New York Times, CNN Africa, BBC àti Voice of America tí fìgbà kan tẹ̀ jáde nínú ìwé ìròyìn wọn. Ó ṣiṣẹ́ láti ṣe àgbékalè lórí làálàá àti ìṣòro tí ó dojú kọ Ìpínlẹ̀ Borno, pàápàá jù lọ, wàhálà àwọn agbésùnmọ̀mí Boko Haram. Ó ṣe iṣẹ́ kan tí ó pè ní Bits of Borno. Àwọn ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo Olúṣẹ́gun Ọ̀ṣọbà (tí wọ́n bí ní Ọjọ́ kẹẹ̀ẹ́dógún oṣù keje ọdún 1939) jẹ́ gbajúmọ̀ òṣèlú ọmọ orílẹ̀-èdè Nàìjíríà àti Gómìnà Ìpínlẹ̀ Ògùn tẹ́lẹ̀. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí àwọn Gómìnà Ìpínlẹ̀ Ògùn Àwọn oníròyìn ará Nàìjíríà
__label__yo André-Marie Ampère FRS (20 January 1775 – 10 June 1836) je onimosayensi omo orile-ede Fransi ti o je gbigba gege bi oluwari isetannagberingberin. Itokasi àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1775 Àwọn ọjọ́aláìsí ní 1836 Àwọn ará Fránsì
__label__yo GET Arena jẹ ibi -ije kart ni Lekki, Eko ni idakeji Oriental Hotel. O ti wa ni pipade patapata. Ibi isere naa tun ṣafikun awọn ile ounjẹ laarin awọn ohun elo miiran bi ile-iṣẹ iṣẹlẹ lati gbalejo awọn apejọ awujọ. Awọn itọkasi
__label__yo Sir Owen Willans Richardson, FRS (26 April 1879 – 15 February 1959) je onimosayensi ara Britani to gba Ebun Nobel ninu Fisiksi. Itokasi Àwọn ẹlẹ́bùn Nobel nínú Físíksì Àwọn ẹlẹ́bùn Nobel ará Brítánì
__label__yo Ilé tí a tún ńndà pè ní Ibùgbé jẹ́ ibi tàbí àyè tí a lè ma sùn tàbí gbé pẹ̀lú àwọn ẹbí wa. Ohun èlò ìkọ́lé Ilé lọ́pọ̀ ma ń jẹ́ ohun tí wọ́n ms ńa fi igi àti ikí kọ́bláyé àtijọ́. Irúfẹ́ ilé báyí ni wọ́n ń ń pè ní Abà. Àmọ́ láyé òde òní, oríṣríṣi ohun èlò ni wọ́n fi ń kọ́lé, àwọn ohun èlò bí: iyẹ̀pẹ̀, sìmẹ́ntì, òkúta, páànù ìṣó àti bẹ́ẹ̀ bẹ́ẹ̀ lọ. Ìrísí rẹ̀ Ilé ma ń ga bí ó bá ṣe wu onílé kí ilé òun ṣe ga sí, ilé gbọ́dọ̀ ní fèrèsé, ẹnu ọ̀nà àbáwọlé, iyàrá ksn tàbí púpọ̀, balùwẹ̀, ilé ìdáná, ilé ìgbọ̀sẹ̀ àti bẹ́ẹ̀ bẹ́ẹ̀ lọ . Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo Jagua Nana ni ìwé àkàgbádùn tí Cyprian Ekwensi kọ ní ọdún 1961. Wọ́n kọ́kọ́ gbé ìwé yí jáde ní ọdún 1975, lábẹ́ ilé-iṣẹ́ Heinemann African Publisher. Ìwé yí da lórí iyè-méjì tí ó ń ṣẹlẹ̀ẹ̀ nínú ayé obirin tí ó jẹ́ olówò nàbì tí ó ti ń dàgbà (Jagua Nana) tí ó jẹ́ olú-èdá ìtàn. The novel is set in the city of Lagos. Oríṣiríṣi àyẹ̀wò ni wọ́n ti fi ìwé yí ṣe pẹ̀lú àwọn iṣẹ́ ònkọ̀wé Charles Dickens, àwọn ayẹ̀wò wọ̀nyí da lè ìgbé ayé àwọn ènìyàn ní inú àwọn ìlú tó ti lajú àti àríwísí nípa ìsòro àwọn ènìyàn tí ó ń gbé nínú àwọn ìlú wọnyí. Critics of the work in the 1980s noted that the novel relies heavily on stereotypical depictions of women, hampering its depiction of life in Africa. Àwọn Itọ́ka sí Ẹ kà síwájú si 1961 novels Novels by Cyprian Ekwensi Novels set in Lagos African Writers Series Novels about prostitution Works about prostitution in Nigeria
__label__yo Waino Aaltonen je onise ona amo omo ile Finlandi. Oníṣé ọnà ara, finland ni èyí. Wọ́n bí i ní 1894. Ó kú ní 1966 Ó ń gbégilére. Ó ń kun nǹkan òun ni ó kọ́kọ́ ṣe agbétẹrù pé kí a máa fi òkúta gbẹ́ nǹkan. Ìgbésíayé
__label__yo Ologun Kutere jẹ gẹ́gẹ́ bi Oba Èkó láti 1780s títí di ọdún 1803. Òun ló jẹ́ lẹ́yìn Oba Eletu Kekere, ẹni tí ó wà lórí oyè láti ọdún sí 1775 and 1780. Ologun Kutere jẹ́ ọmọ Erelu Kuti, ẹni tí ó jé ọmọ Oba Ado, àti Alaagba ('Alagbigba'), ẹni tí ó jẹ́ ọmọ Ìjẹ̀sà àti olùbádámọ̀ràn Oba Akinsemoyin. Ìtàn rẹ̀ Bàbá Kutere jẹ́ Babaláwo ní Ìpínlẹ̀ Èkó nígbà àwọn ọdún 1700s. Nígbà tí Kutere wà lórí oyè, ìbárà láàrin Èkó àti and Ijebu wọ́pọ̀ si, àwọn Ìjẹ̀bú gbé oúnjẹ wá láti gba iyọ̀, tobacco, spirits, àti àwọn ìkan míràn tí àwọn Èkó gbà lọ́wọ́ àwọn ara ẹrú tí orílẹ̀ èdè Portugal. Ologun Kutere lówó, ó sì jẹ́ ẹni tí ọ̀pọ̀ bẹ̀rù. Kutere ní ọmọ tópọ̀, àwọn bi;Eshinlokun, Adele Ajosun, Akitoye, Akiolu, Olukoya, àti Olusi. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo Teide ti wa ni a onina be lori erekusu ti Tenerife (Àwọn Erékùṣù Kánárì, Spéìn). O igbese 3718 mita loke okun ipele ṣiṣe awọn ti o ga agesin ni Spéìn ati awọn erekùṣu kariaye ti Òkun Atlántíkì. Ni afikun, 7,500 mita loke awọn pakà òkun ni aye ká kẹta tobi onileru. O je kan mimọ ibi kan fun awọn Guanches, atijọ olugbe ti awọn erekusu. Niwon 2007 ni a Ibi Ọ̀ṣọ́ Àgbáyé. Àwọn Erékùṣù Kánárì Àwọn Ibi Ọ̀ṣọ́ Àgbáyé
__label__yo Okpa jẹ́ oúnjẹ ilẹ̀ Ibo tí wọ́n máa ń fi ẹ̀pà Bambara ṣe. Ó wọ́pọ̀ láàrin àwọn ènìyàn tó wá láti Ìpínlẹ̀ Ẹnúgu, wọ́n sì kà á mọ́ oúnjẹ ìbílẹ̀ Naijiria. Kìí ṣe àwọn Ibo nìkan ló ń jẹ Okpa, àwọn ẹ̀yà mìíràn máa ń jẹ Okpa pẹ̀lú ògì tàbí kí wọ́n jẹ ẹ́ lásán. Orúkọ mìíràn tí wọ́n máa ń pe Okpa ni; ịgba àti Ntucha. Àwọn Hausa máa ń pè é ní Gurjiya tàbí kwaruru. Àwọn àwòrán Àwọn ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo Ijẹrisi iwe-aṣẹ awakọ ni Benin Nigbati oludije kan ba gba ni pato si awọn idanwo iwe-aṣẹ awakọ fẹ lati ni aṣẹ lati wakọ ọkọ lati awọn wakati ti o tẹle ikede ti awọn abajade, ijẹrisi ti a fun ni. Iwe-ẹri yii le jẹ lilo nipasẹ ẹni ti oro kan titi iwe-aṣẹ awakọ yoo wa. O wulo fun akoko kan ti meji (02) osu. Iwe-ẹri ti funni Akojọ ti awọn iwe aṣẹ lati pese ID eni *Ti a beere (kaadi ID, CIP, iwe irinna) Fọto ID fun yiyọ kuro ti ijẹrisi rẹ Tani o le bere? Oludije eyikeyi gba ni pato si awọn idanwo iwe-aṣẹ awakọ Ofin (Benin): Arrêté n° 002/MIT/CC/SGM/CTJ/ANaTT/SA/017SGG16 du 09 janvier 2017 portant fixation des montants des prestations de l’Agence Nationale des Transports Terrestres Awọn igbesẹ fun olumulo: Waye lori ayelujara lori E-YEBOU nipasẹ ọna asopọ https://e-yebou.com/produit/attestation-de-permis-de-conduire/ nipa fifun alaye ati awọn iwe aṣẹ ti o beere. Iwọ yoo gba imeeli ijẹrisi lati ọdọ olupese iṣẹ. Nilo afikun alaye? Jọwọ kan si https://service-public.bj eyiti o jẹ ile-ẹkọ ti o peye nikan ti o ṣe agbejade gbogbo awọn iṣe oriṣiriṣi lori ayelujara ni Benin.
__label__yo Babátúndé Húnpẹ (tí wọ́n bí ní Ọjọ́ kejì oṣù kẹjọ ọdún 1963) jẹ́ Olóṣèlú ọmọ bíbí ìlú Àgbádárìgì (Badagry) ní Ìpínlẹ̀ Èkó ní orílẹ̀ èdè Nàìjíríà. Ó jẹ́ ọmọ ilé ìgbìmọ̀ aṣojú-aṣòfin Nàìjíríà tí ó ń ṣojú ìjọba ìbílẹ̀ Àgbádárìgì (Badagry Federal Constituency) lọ́wọ́́lọ́wọ́. Ìgbé-ayé rẹ̀ lágbo òṣèlú Kí ó tó di ọmọ ẹgbẹ́ ilé aṣojú-ṣòfin, tó ń ṣojú ẹkùn ìdìbò Àgbádárìgì (Badagry Federal Constituency) ó ti fìgbà kan ṣiṣẹ́ ní Fásitì ìpínlẹ̀ Èkó (Lagos State University), ó jẹ́ Olùdámọ̀ràn Pàtàkì fún Gómìnà-àná fún ìpínlẹ̀ Èkó, Akínwùnmí Aḿbọ̀dé lórí ètò àyíká lọ́dún 2015 sí 2019. Bẹ́ẹ̀ náà ó bá Babátúndé Rájí Fáṣọlá ṣiṣẹ́ gẹ́gẹ́ bí òlùràlọ́wọ́ pàtàkì lórí àyíká nígbà ìṣèjọba rẹ̀ gẹ́gẹ́ bí gómìnà ìpínlẹ̀ Èkó lọ́dún 2011 sí 2015. Ọmọ ẹgbẹ́ òṣèlú All Progressives Congress ni. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí Àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1963
__label__yo Otolorin Kehinde Peter, tí orúkọ ìnagijẹ rẹ̀ ń jẹ́ Kenny Blaq, jẹ́ olórin àti apanilẹ́rìn-ín orílẹ̀-èdè Nàìjíríà. Ó ṣeré níbi ayẹyẹ kejì ti Naija Independence àti ayẹyẹ àṣekágbá ti Africa Magic. Ìbẹ̀rẹ̀pẹ̀pẹ̀ ayé rẹ̀ kenny Blaq kàwé alákọ̀ọ́bẹ̀rẹ̀ àti girama ní Ejigbo, ní Ìpínlẹ̀ Èkó. Ó ní láti kúrò ní SS3 láti lọ sí ilẹ́-ẹ̀kọ́ mìíràn nígbà tí àwọn òbí rẹ̀ ò lè san owó ilé-ìwé rẹ̀ mọ́. Ó kẹ́kọ̀ọ́, ó sì ṣiṣẹ́ gẹ́gẹ́ bí agbéròyìn sáfẹ́fẹ́ ní ilé-ìwé FRCN ní ìpínlẹ̀ Èkó. Iṣẹ́ rè Blaq bẹ̀rẹ̀ iṣẹ́ apanilẹ́rìn-ín rẹ̀ ní ọdún 2008, ó sì ti ṣeré lọ́pọ̀lọpọ̀ ayẹyẹ ní orílẹ̀-èdè Nàìjíríà àti lókè òkun bí i I laff pẹ̀lú Mc Abbey, Gbenga Adeyinka (Laffmattaz), Ali Baba's & Fina - Ali , Mc Amana's (DiSpeakable Me), Cool FM Praise JAM, DAREY's Love Like A Movie, AY LIVE, BasketMouth's (Lord of the Ribs), Africa Laughs (Uganda), SEKA Live (Rwanda) ECOFEST (Sierra Leone) àti BENIN GLO LAFFTA FEST (Nigeria) Ayẹyẹ apanilẹ́rìn-ín tó jẹ́ tirẹ̀ gan-an tó pè ní The Oxymoron Of Kennyblaq gba àmì-ẹ̀yẹ eré apanilẹ́rìn-ín tó dára jù lọ ní ọdún 2017 àti 2018. Àtọ̀jọ àwọn àmì-ẹ̀yẹ rẹ̀ Àwọn ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo jẹ́ ọ̀kan nínú àwọn igberiko 9 ní orílẹ̀-èdè Gúúsù Áfíríkà. Mpumalanga jẹ́ ọ̀kan gbòógì ìlú tí ó ni ibi ìgbafẹ́ púpọ̀. Àwọn ilé ìgbafẹ́ tí wọ́n wà níbẹ̀: Odo Blyde Kanyo, Ipase ibere, Fèrèsé Ọlọ́run, Age gagara ti o wa ni kilomita marun-din-logoji Graskopu ni oju ona Panorama, Ogba Lofedi ti oni orisirisi nkan ogbin ti o le ni ẹgbẹ̀rún méjì, Iho gbohun gbohun, Adágún odò kiirisi irú rẹ̀ tí ó tóbi ju ní gúúsù Áfíríkà, Oke ikoja, Ilé ìgbafẹ́ Gustafu. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí Àwọn Ìgbèríko ilẹ̀ Gúúsù Áfríkà
__label__yo This is a list of administrators and governors of Niger State. Niger State was formed on 1976-02-03 when it was split out from Sokoto State. E tun wo States of Nigeria List of all Nigerian state governors References Niger State Gomina
__label__yo Shade Omoniyi (bi Folashade Omoniyi; 16 April 1971), to dara mọ nipa rẹ Lepa Shandy, ni a oṣere ere Yorùbá ti a se apejuwe nipasẹ awọn iniwe iroyin bi "a oniwosan ati ọkan ninu awọn aṣáájú ere Yorùbá . Shade jẹ ohun kikọ ti o dun ni fiimu kan pẹlu akọle kanna. Selected filmography Eri Ife Leyi (2016) Nkan Agbara (2008) Akámó (2007) Iru Kileyi (2007) Iyawo Elenu Razor (2006) Ògo ìdílé (2004) Oyato (2003) Tim ba Taiye Wa (2003) Kosorogun (2002) Lepa Shandy (2002) Breaking Point (1996) Awọn itọkasi Àwọn òṣeré ará Nàìjíríà Àwọn ọmọ Yorùbá Àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1971 Àwọn ènìyàn alààyè
__label__yo Dosunmu (1823 – 1885), tí àwọn ènìyàn mọ̀ sí Docemo, gẹ́gẹ́ bí ó ṣe wà ní àkọsílẹ̀ ní ìwé ìlú ayaaba ṣe ìjọba rẹ̀ ní ìlú Èkó láti ọdún 1853 lẹ́yìn ìgbà tó joyè lẹ́yìn ikú bàbá rè Ọba Akitoye, títí di ìgbà tó fi kú ní ọdún 1885. Ó sá lọ sí ìlú ayaaba ní oṣù kẹ́jọ ọdún 1861 nènìyànwí pé àwọn ènìyàn lé pa á Bó ṣe jọba Dí oòuùmuúaṣe gu orí oyè kò sí ní ìlànà pẹ̀lú bí ọba ṣe yẹ kó jẹ ní ìlú Èkó nítorí wí pé àwọn àjọ Ìlú ayaaba ló fi sí orí oyè. Orúkọ ẹni tó fi sí orí oyè gan-an jẹ́ Benjamin Campbell. Èyí ṣẹlẹ̀ lẹ́yìn ìgbà tí ìlú ayaaba dá sí ọ̀rọ̀ Ìlú Èkó ní Oṣù Kejìlá ọdún 1851. iampbell htí gbọ́ nípa ikú Ọba Akítóyé ní ọjọ́ kejì oṣù kẹsàn-án ọdún 1853 láti ọwọ́ C.C Gollmer tó ń bá CMS ṣiṣẹ́ ṣùgbọ́n kò sọ fún àwọn afọbajẹ. Ohun tó bèrè lọ́wọ́ wọn ni wí pé tá ni ó yẹ àròlélỌba Akítóyé eẹ́yìn tó bá wàjà. Gbogbo afọbajẹ gba wí pé Dòsùnmú náà ni oyè tó sí lẹ́yìn bàbá rẹ̀. Ọjọ́ kejì ọjọ́ náà ni Ọba Dòsùnmú gùn orí ipò àwọn bàbá rẹ̀ Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo Princella Adubea jẹ agbabọọlu lobinrin ilẹ̀ ghana ti a bini 27, óṣu December ni ọdun 1998. Agbabọọlu naa ṣere fun Racing de Santander gẹgẹbi ipo forward. Àṣeyọri Princella kopa ninu FIFA Cup awọn obinrin agbaye to waye ni ọdun 2018. Itọkasi
__label__yo Adamu Gumba jẹ́ olóṣèlú ọmọ orílẹ̀ èdè Nàìjíríà tí wọ́n dìbò yàn wọlé gẹ́gẹ́ bí aṣojú Gúúsù Ìpínlẹ̀ Bauchi ní ilé ìgbìmọ̀ aṣòfin àgbà ti ilẹ̀ Nàìjíríà. Ó jẹ́ aṣojú ní ilé ìgbìmọ̀ aṣòfin lẹ́yìn tí ó wọlé látàrí ètò ìdìbò ti oṣù kẹrin ọdún 2011 lábẹ́ ẹgbẹ́ òṣèlú People's Democratic Party. Ó jẹ́ olórí àwọn òṣìṣẹ́ ìjọba ti Bauchi. Àwọn ìtọ́kasí Àyọkà kúkurú Àwọn ọmọ Ilé Alàgbà ilẹ̀ Nàìjíríà
__label__yo Adalu jẹ ounje kan ti á màn pe ni Asáró ni orilẹ-ede Naijiria ti a hún fí agbado ati ẹwa sè, o de gbajumo laarin awọn Yoruba ati awọn Igbo. Igbaradi A o se agbado ati ewa lọtọ ki a to da awon mejéjì pápọ . A ó sí fi epo púpa, alubosa, ata ati iyọ si ko le ba dun. A má n jé Adalu pelú ogede ati eja sisun. Wo awon eleyi na Ounje ni ilu Naijiria agbado didun Ewa aganyin, ounje Naijiria miiran ti a hún fí ewa se. Awọn itọkasi
__label__yo Oluchi Mercy Okorie tí a bí ní ọjọ́ kejìdínlọgbọ̀n osù kẹjọ ọdún 1981 ní Ìlú Èkó jẹ́ agbábọ́ọ̀lù sínú agbọ̀n ti orílẹ̀-ède Nàìjíríà tẹ́lẹ̀ rí tí ó gbábọ́ọ̀lù fún First Bank BC àti ẹgbẹ́ orílẹ̀-ède Nàìjíríà . Ó ṣe aṣojú Nàìjíríà ní bi 2005, 2006 àti 2007 FIBA Africa Championship . iṣẹ́ Ìdárayá síse Láti ogúnjọ́ sí ọjọ́ kejìdínlọ́gbọ̀n Oṣù kejìlá, ní gbọ̀ngàn eré ìdárayá inú ilé ní Abuja, Nàìjíríà tí wọ́n ti gbàlejò FIBA Africa Championship fún àwọn obìnrin ní ọdún 2005 . Níbi ayeye náà, Oluchi ló sojú orílẹ̀-ède Nàìjíríà tó sì gba ààmì ẹ̀yẹ wúrà. Ní bi 2006 FIBA Africa Women's Club Champions Cup èyí tí ó kópa, Oluchi gba ààmì ẹ̀yẹ idẹ. Àwọn ìtọ́kasí Àwọn ènìyàn alààyè Àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1981
__label__yo Chung Un-chan (Abíi ní February 29, 1946 ní Gongju, Chungcheongnam-do, Korea Guusu) ó jẹ́ Alákoso Àgbà ilẹ̀ Korea Guusu láti ọjọ́ kọkàndínlọ́gbọ̀n (29) Oṣù Kẹsàn-an (September)ní 2009 dé ọjọ́ kọkànlá (11) oṣù kẹjọ (Agust)(2010). Ó jẹ́ ọ̀jọ̀gbọ́n ní Seoul National University láti 1978 dé2009, kí wọn ó tó yan-àn gẹ́gẹ́ bíi alákoso Àgbà, níbi tí ó ti jẹ ààrẹ yunifásítì náà láti July 2002 dè July 2006. Ìtọ́kasí àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1946 Àwọn ará Kòréà Gúúsù
__label__yo Sophia Edward Mwasikili tí a bí ní ọjọ́ kẹrin osù Kẹrin ọdún 1986 jẹ́ ogbóǹtarìgì agbábọ́ọ̀lù ọmọ orílẹ̀-ède Tanzania tí ó ṣeré ipò olùgbèjà lórí pápá àti asáájú fún ẹgbẹ́ agbábọ́ọ̀lù obìnrin Tanzania . Isẹ́ òkè-òkun Mwasikili ti sojú orílẹ̀-ède Tanzania ní ìpele àgbà ní bi ìdíje Africa Women Cup of Nations qualificationti ọdún 2018 . Àwọn ìtọ́kasí Àwọn ènìyàn alààyè Àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1986
__label__yo Pseudanisentomon jẹ́ ìdílé àwọn proturan nínú ẹ̀bí Eosentomidae. Àwọn ẹ̀yà Pseudanisentomon babai (Imadaté, 1964) Pseudanisentomon cangshanense Imadaté, Yin & Xie, 1995 Pseudanisentomon dolichempodium (Yin & Zhang, 1982) Pseudanisentomon guangxinicum (Yin & Zhang, 1982) Pseudanisentomon huichouense Zhang & Yin, 1984 Pseudanisentomon ishii Nakamura, 1996 Pseudanisentomon jiangxiensis Yin, 1987 Pseudanisentomon meihwa (Yin, 1965) Pseudanisentomon minystigmum (Yin, 1979) Pseudanisentomon molykos Zhang & Yin, 1984 Pseudanisentomon paurophthalmum Zhang & Yin, 1984 Pseudanisentomon pedanempodium (Zhang & Yin, 1981) Pseudanisentomon sheshanensis (Yin, 1965) Pseudanisentomon sininotiale Zhang & Yin, 1984 Pseudanisentomon songkiangense Yin, 1977 Pseudanisentomon trilinum (Zhang & Yin, 1981) Pseudanisentomon wanense Zhang, 1987 Pseudanisentomon yaoshanense Zhang & Yin, 1984 Pseudanisentomon yongxingense Yin, 1988 Àwọn ìtọ́kasí Àyọkà kúkurú
__label__yo Alexander Crummell (March 3, 1819, New York City - September 10, 1898, Red Bank, New Jersey) je alufa, ojogbon ati asetolomoorile-ede ara African. Itokasi Àwọn ọmọ Áfríkà Amẹ́ríkà Àwọn apokoẹrúrẹ́ ará Amẹ́ríkà
__label__yo George Gordon Byron, 6th Baron Byron, later George Gordon Noel, 6th Baron Byron, FRS (22 January 1788 – 19 April 1824), to gbajumo bi Lord Byron (Iba Bairon), je akoewi ara Britani ati eni asiwaju ninu Iseromansi. Ninu awon iwe Byron to gbajumo julo ni She Walks in Beauty, When We Two Parted, ati So, we'll go no more a roving, Childe Harold's Pilgrimage ati Don Juan. O je ikan ninu awon akoewi ara Britani to lokikijulo, won si unka awon iwe re titi doni. Itokasi àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1788 Àwọn ọjọ́aláìsí ní 1824 Àwọn ará Brítánì
__label__yo Celeste Ntuli (bíi ni kẹẹdọgbọn oṣù kẹjọ ọdún 1978) jẹ́ òṣèré àti aláwàdà ní orílẹ̀ èdè South Áfríkà. Ó gbajúmọ̀ gẹ́gẹ́ bí olòrì fún ẹ̀fẹ̀ ni ilẹ̀ Zulu. Wọ́n bíi Ntuli ni ìlú Empangeni níbi ó ti gba ẹ̀kọ́ ìbẹ̀rẹ̀ pẹ̀pẹ̀ rẹ̀. Òun ni ọmọ kẹfà láàrín àwọn ọmọ mẹjọ tí àwọn òbí rẹ bí. Ó lọ sí ilé ẹ̀kọ́ gíga tí Durban University of Technology. Iṣẹ́ Ní ọdún 2005, ó ṣe ẹ̀fẹ̀ àkókò rẹ ni ilé ìjọsìn ni Durban. Ó to ṣe orisirisi ẹ̀fẹ̀, láàrin àwọn ayẹyẹ tí ó ti se ẹ̀fẹ̀ ni Blacks Only comedy showcase ní ọdún 2010 àti 2012, SA Comic’s Choice Awards 2012. Ó ti kopa ninu awọn eré bíi Isibaya, 10 Days in Sun City, Lockdown, Looking For Love àti Trippin with Skhumba. Ní ọdún 2014, ó gbà àmì ẹ̀yẹ Best Supporting Actress láti odo Golden Horn Award. Ní ọdún 2018, wọn yàán fún orisirisi àmì ẹ̀yẹ láti ọ̀dọ̀ Comics' Choice Awards. Ó gbà àmì ẹ̀yẹ Flying Solo àti Comedy G Award láti ọ̀dọ̀ Savanna Comics Choice Awards. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo Awọn ile-iwosan Lagoon, jẹ́ ọkàn nínú àwọn ilé-ìwòsàn tí ó tóbi jùlọ ní Nigeria. Ìbi ti àwon ilé-ìwòsàn wọn wà Wọ́n dá ilé-ìwòsàn yìí sílẹ̀ ní ọdún 1986 lábẹ́ Ẹgbẹ́ Hygeia, ilé-iṣẹ ìlera yìí ń ṣe ìtọ́jú ọ̀pọ̀lọpọ̀ awọn àìsàn. Ibùgbé mẹ́rin ọ̀tọ̀ọ̀tọ̀ ní ilé-ìwòsàn yìí ní ẹ̀ka sí; àwon náà ni: ilé-ìwòsàn Lagoon Apapa, ilé-ìwòsàn Lagoon Ikeja, ilé-ìwòsàn Lagoon Victoria Island ati ilé-ìwòsàn Lagoon Ikoyi. Ilé-ìwòsàn tí Apapa jẹ olú-iléìwòsàn náà. Laipẹ̀, wọ́n tún pẹ̀ka ilé-iṣẹ́ méjì mìíràn ní Adeniyi Jones, Ikeja ati Lagoon Specialist Suites ni Victoria Island, apapọ gbogbo rè jé mẹfa. Awọn iṣẹlẹ pataki Awọn ile-iwosan Lagoon ti ṣe aṣáájú-ọnà nínú ilọsiwaju ètò ilera ni Naijiria. Ile-iwosan Lagoon jé ile-iwosan aladani akọkọ ni orilẹ-ede Nàìjíríà TiVo koko se abe òkan ní aseyori. Àwon egbé omosedaju Dokita ní Nàìjirià ni o se abe náà. Àríyànjiyàn nipa ile ìwòsàn yìí Àwon ènìyàn bèrè si un soro òdì si lagoon hospital nígbà ti òrò kan kókó jáde pé “wòn pan dadan fun àwon alaisan lati sanwo ki wón tó rí itọju”. Sùgbón awọn oṣiṣẹ ilé ìwòsàn náà ní oro ko rí bè. Awọn itọkasi
__label__yo Ẹgbẹ́ Akọ́mọlédè àti àṣà Yorùbá jẹ́ àgbárí-jọ-pọ Àwọn olùkọ́ nílé ìwé alákọ̀ọ́bẹ̀rẹ̀, girama àti ilé ẹ̀kọ́ fásitì ti ìjọba pẹ̀lú aládàáni jákè jádò ilẹ̀ Nàjíríà. Ẹgbẹ́ yìí ń ṣojú Yorùbá níbi ìgbé lárugẹ èdè, àṣà àti ìdàgbà sókè ìṣèṣe Yorùbá Àwọn ìtọ́ka sí Nigerian languages
__label__yo Patrick Augustus Mervyn Manning (ojoibi 17 August 1946) je oloselu ati Alakoso Agba kerin ati ikefa orile-ede Trinidad ati Tobago tele, bakanna tele ohun lo je olori egbe oselu People's National Movement (PNM). O di Alakoaso Agba lati 17 December 1991 de 9 November 1995 ati lati 24 December 2001 titi di 26 May 2010. O tun je Olori Olodi lati 1986 de 1990 ati from 1995 to 2001. Ohun nlo je olori egbe oloselu PNM lati 1987 de 2010. O gba eko bi aseorooriile, Manning ti je bi Omo Ileasofin fun agbegbe Ilaorun San Fernando lati 1971, loni ohun ni omo Ile awon Asoju to wa nibe pejulo. Itokasi àwọn ará Trínídád àti Tòbágò
__label__yo Anthony Olufunsho Williams (Oṣu Karun ojo kesan, 1948 - Oṣu Keje 27, 2006) je oloselu lati Ipinle Eko ati Oludari Alakoso labẹ Isakoso Ologun ti ile-igbimọ Colonel Olagunsoye Oyinlola ni Lagos. Funsho Williams lọ si ile-iwe St. Paul's Catholic ni Ebute Metta ati lẹhinna St Gregory's College, Lagos . Ni ọdun 1968, o kọ ẹkọ ni Yunifasiti ti Lagos , o ni ipele kan ninu imọ-ẹrọ ilu . Lẹhinna o lọ siwaju lati lọ si ile- iṣẹ Imọ-ẹrọ ti New Jersey fun idiyele Titunto si rẹ . Àwọn ọjọ́aláìsí ní 2006 Àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1948 Pages with unreviewed translations
__label__yo Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa (ọjọ́ìbí 17 November 1952) ni olòṣèlú ará Gúúsù Áfríkà àti politician and the fifth and current Ààrẹ ilẹ̀ Gúúsù Áfríkà 5k tó wà níbẹ̀ lọ́wọ́lọ́wọ́. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí Àwọn Ààrẹ ilẹ̀ Gúúsù Áfríkà
__label__yo Articles using infobox radio station Wazobia 95.1 FM Lagos jẹ́ ìkànnì agbóhùn sáfẹ́fẹ́ àdàmọ̀dì-Gẹ̀ẹ́sì Nàìjíríà ní ìpínlẹ̀ Èkó. A dá sílẹ̀ ní ọdún 2007, ó jẹ́ ti Globe communication Limited. Wazobia Fm Lagos jẹ́ mímọ̀ fún ọ̀nà ìpanilẹ́rìn ín láti gbóhùn sáfẹ́fẹ́ . Ìkànnì náà máa ń gbé ètò bí i ìròyìn, orin, eré-ìdárayá, ìfọ̀rọ̀wánilẹ́nuwò, ọ̀rọ̀ tó ń lọ sáfẹ́fẹ́. . "Owogram.com" fi Wazobia Fm Lagos sí ìpó kínní nínú àwọn ìkànnì agbóhùn sáfẹ́fẹ́ mẹ́wàá tí ó dára jùlọ ní ìpínlẹ̀ Èkó, ó fi kun pé "ó jẹ́ ìkànnì agbóhùn sáfẹ́fẹ́ tó jẹ́ ààyò tí ọ̀pọ̀lọpọ̀ ọmọ Nàìjíríà máa ń kàn sí pàápàá ní Èkó. Ó jẹ́ ìkànnì agbóhùn sáfẹ́fẹ́ àdàmọ̀dì-Gẹ̀ẹ́sì àkọ́kọ́ ní Nàìjíríà tí ó sì máa ṣe ètò ni èdè àdàmọ̀dì-Gẹ̀ẹ́sì, tí onírúurú ènìyàn sì máa ń gbàdùn. Gbogbo ènìyàn ni ó máa ń gbàdùn rẹ̀. "Alternative Adverts" ṣe akojọ ile-iṣẹ redio naa gẹgẹbi nọmba akọkọ ninu atokọ 10 ti o ga julọ ti awọn ile-iṣẹ redio ti o ṣabẹwo julọ ni Ipinle Eko, ọdun 2019. Wọn tun fi kun pe “Wazobia FM ni awọn mejeeji n gbọ ati igbadun nipasẹ gbogbo awọn ẹka eniyan; awakọ ọkọ akero, awọn oṣiṣẹ, awọn ọmọ ile-iwe, awọn obinrin ọja, ati bẹbẹ lọ. O jẹ ibudo itunu fun gbogbo eniyan."
__label__yo tí wọ́n bí ní Ọjọ́ kọ̀kàndínlógún oṣù kẹwàá ọdún 1988 (21st October 1988) jẹ́ gbajúmọ̀ òṣèrébìnrin sinimá àgbéléwò ọmọ bíbí ìpínlẹ̀ Èkó, lórílẹ̀-èdè Nàìjíríà. Ó jẹ́ ọ̀kan nínú àwọn ọmọ gbajúgbajà òṣèré sinimá àgbéléwò, ọmọba Jídé Kòsọ́kọ́. Ẹbí wọn ní à bá má pè ní ẹbí sinimá àgbéléwò lórílẹ̀ èdè Nàìjíríà, nítorí yàtọ̀ sí bàbá rẹ̀, ẹ̀gbọ́n rẹ̀ Ṣọlá Kòsọ́kọ́ àti ìyàwó bàbá rẹ̀, olóògbé Henrietta Kòsọ́kọ́ náà jẹ́ gbajúmọ̀ òṣèré sinimá àgbéléwò. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí Àwọn òṣeré ará Nàìjíríà Àwọn ará Nàìjíríà
__label__yo Articles with hCards Bimbo Thomas jẹ́ òṣèrẹ́bìnrin ti orílẹ̀-èdè Nàìjíríà, àti aṣàgbéjáde fíìmù, ó sì tún jẹ́ oníṣòwò. Ìgbésí ayé àti ètò-ẹ̀kọ́ rẹ̀ Wọ́n bí Bimbo Thomas sí Ìpínlẹ̀ Èkó, sínú ìdílé elénìyàn méje. Ó gba àmì-ẹ̀yẹ nínú ẹ̀kọ́ Creative Arts láti University of Lagos. Iṣẹ́ tó yàn láàyọ̀ Bimbo bẹ̀rẹ̀ iṣẹ́ òṣèré gẹ́gẹ́ bí i akọ́nimọ̀ọ́ṣe pẹ̀lú ẹgbẹ́ Odun Ifa. WỌ́n mọ̀ ọ́n fún ìkópa rẹ̀ nínú fíìmù Omo Ghetto àti apá kejì fíìmù náà Omo Ghetto: Saga. Àtòjọ àwọn fíìmù rẹ̀ Omo Ghetto: The Saga Omo Ghetto Oludamoran Aye Are Eruku Nla Opolo Omo Poly Omoniyun Ologbo apaadi (2019) Omoniyun (2019) Oṣuwọn ijẹfaaji (2021) Rancor (2022) Àwọn ìtọ́kasí Àwọn oníṣòwò ará Nàìjíríà Àwọn ènìyàn alààyè
__label__yo Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 family, member A3, tí a tún mọ̀ sí ALDH1A3 tàbí retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 3 (RALDH3), jẹ́ enzyme nínú àwọn ènìyàn tí ALDH1A3 gene, ń kóòdù fún Iṣẹ́ rẹ̀ Aldehyde dehydrogenase isozymes jẹ́ àwọn enzymes tí a rò wípé wọ́n ń ṣiṣẹ́ takuntakun ní pípa oró àwọn aldehyde tí ó jẹyọ nínú ètò ògógóró àti ìtúká lipid nínú ara. Àwọn enzyme tí ó ń kóòdù fún gene yìí máa ń lo retinal gẹ́gẹ́ bí ohun ìbẹ̀rẹ̀, yálà lọ́fẹ́ tàbí retinal tí ó tòrò mọ́ protein nínú sẹ́ẹ̀lì. Àwọn ìtọ́kasí Ìwé àkàsíwájú síi Àyọkà kúkurú
__label__yo Vida Opoku jẹ agabọọlu lobinrin ilẹ ghana ti a bini ọjọ 15, óṣu December ni ọdun 1997. Agbabọọlu naa ṣere fun awọn ọdọmọbinrin Olympique Marseille gẹ̀gẹbi defender. Àṣeyọri Vida kopa ninu Cup FIFA U-17 awọn obinrin agbaye ti ọdun 2012, 2014 ati 2016. Itọkasi
__label__yo Henry Olusegun Adeola Samuel (ọjọ́ìbí 19 February 1963), tó gbajúmọ̀ pẹ̀lú orúkọ ìnagijẹ rẹ̀ bíi Seal, ni akọrin àti olùdá-orin ará Brítánì. Àwo orin rẹ̀ ti tà tó 20 millionu àwo orin káàkiri àgbáyé, pẹ̀lú orin rẹ̀, "Crazy", tó gbéjáde ní ọdún 1991; àti "Kiss from a Rose", tó gbéjáde ní ọdún 1994. Itokasi
__label__yo Teresa, jẹ́ fíìmù oníṣókí kan ti ọdún 2010 tí wọ́n ṣe ní Equatoial Guinea tí olùdarí rẹ̀ n ṣe Thato Rantao Mwosa, èyí tí ààjo ilé-ìkàwé orílẹ̀-èdè Equatorial Guinea ṣe onígbọ̀wọ́ rẹ̀. Guillermina Mekuy Mba Obono lẹni tí ó kọ ìtàn eré náà. Àwọn olùkópa rẹ̀ pẹ̀lú Elena Iyanga, Betty KB, àti Dina Anguesomo. Eré náà jẹ́ àkọ́kọ́ fíìmù Equatorial Guinea tí wọ́n ma ṣe tó sì gùn níwọ̀nba. Àwọn olùkópa Elena Iyanga as Teresa Betty K.B. Dina Anguesomo Àwọn ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo jagunjagun Idumota (Yoruba: Sojadumota) nigba miiran a ma n pe ni Ọmọ-ogun Aimọ, jẹ cenotaph ti o wa ni Idumota, igberiko Lagos, ni Lagos State, Nigeria. Odun 1948 ni ijọba orilẹede Naijiria kọ ati kọ ọ lati ṣe iranti awọn ọmọ ogun ti o ku lakoko Ogun Agbaye I ati Ogun Agbaye Keji. itọkasi
__label__yo Ẹ̀bùn Nobel nínú Lítíréṣọ̀ () jẹ́ ẹ̀bùn ọlọ́dọọdún, láti 1901, tí wọ́n máa ń fun àwọn oǹkọ̀wé láti orílẹ̀-èdè yìówù tí wá, gẹ́gẹ́ bí ogun Alfred Nobel ṣe sọ, o se "ninu papa litireso ise pataki lona to daa" (ni ede Sweden: den som inom litteraturen har producerat det utmärktaste i idealisk riktning). Akademi Swidin lo n pinnu tani, ti onitoun ba wa, yio gba ebun na ninu odun kan, won si n sekede oruko onitoun ninu osu kewa odun. Itokasi Ẹ̀bùn Nobel
__label__yo Coral Herrera Gómez (ti a bi 1977) jẹ onkọwe ati oluja fun obirin ti orile ede Spain kan ti o gbe moo i Costa Rica , ti a mọ fun idaniloju rẹ ti ariyanjiyan ife ifẹ ati awọn ẹbun rẹ si awọn ẹkọ ti o ṣe ayẹwo . Awọn itọkasi Àwọn ènìyàn alààyè Àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1977 Pages with unreviewed translations
__label__yo Kathryn Ryan Cordell Thornton (Ph.D.) (ojoibi August 17, 1952 in Montgomery, Alabama) je onimosayensi ati arinlofurufu tele fun NASA ara Amerika to ti lo wakati 975 ni ofurufu. Lowolowo ohun ni Igbakeji Olori Eko fun awon Eto Iparieko ni Ile-Eko Iseero ati Sayensi Alamulo ti University of Virginia. Itokasi Àwọn arìnlófurufú ará Amẹ́ríkà
__label__yo Odó ni ohun-èlò ilé ìdáná kan tí a má ń sábàá lò láti fi lọ ata, gún ẹ̀wà, èlùbọ́ Iyán àti bẹ́ẹ̀ bẹ́ẹ̀ lọ nípa fífi ọmọ odó gún wọn pọ̀ títí yóò fi rí bí a tí ń fẹ́. Ìrísí rẹ̀ Odó () tí a ń wí yí ni ìrísí rẹ̀ dà bí igbá roboto. Ohun tí wọ́n fi ń ṣe odó Wọ́n ma ń ṣe odó láti ara akọ igi, irin,sẹ̀rámíìkì, tàbí akọ òkúta bí àpáta Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo Ile-iwosan Orthopedic Igbobi jẹ ile-iwosan ni Ilu Eko, Nigeria. Itan Ile-iwosan Orthopedic ti Orilẹ-ede, Igbobi, Lagos bẹrẹ awọn iṣẹ bii ile-iṣẹ isọdọtun fun awọn ọmọ ogun ti o gbọgbẹ lakoko Ogun Agbaye II ni ọdun 1943, lẹhin eyi o dagbasoke si ile-iwosan labẹ awọn iṣẹ iṣoogun ti Ilu Gẹẹsi ti Colonial Nigeria ti Colonial Nigeria ni 6 Oṣù Kejìlá 1945. Ile-iwosan naa, ti kọkọ pe orukọ rẹ. Ile-iwosan Royal Orthopedic ni ọdun 1956 tun ṣe iranlọwọ lati tọju awọn ọmọ ogun ti o farapa ati awọn ara ilu ti Ogun Abele Naijiria ti 1967-1970. Odun 1975 ni won fi ile-iwosan naa le ijoba ipinle Eko lowo, leyin naa ijoba apapo ni odun 1979. Itọju Ilera Ile-iwosan naa ni agbara oṣiṣẹ ti o to 1300. O ni ẹyọ itọju aladanla ati agbara ibusun 450 kan. Ile-iwosan ti wa ni bayi pe o jẹ ile-iwosan orthopedic ti o tobi julọ ni Iwọ-oorun Afirika. Mobolaji Bank Anthony ṣe owo fun apakan titun ti ile-iwosan ti o wa pẹlu atunṣe ti ile-iṣẹ pajawiri.
__label__yo Ossie Davis (December 18, 1917 – February 4, 2005) je omo Afrika-Amerika osere filmu, oludari filmu, akoewi, olukoere, olukowe, ati alakitiyan awujo. Igba ewe Davis je bibi bi Raiford Chatman Davis ni Cogdell, Clinch County, Georgia, omokunrin Kince Charles Davis, onise-ero iko oko ojuirin, ati iyawo re Laura Cooper. The name Ossie came from a county clerk who misheard his mother's pronunciation of his initials "R.C." when he was born. Bi awon obi re se fe, o lo gbeko ni Yunifasiti Howard sugbon o kuro nibe laipari ni 1939 lati ba bere sini se ise osere ni ilu New York; lojowaju o lo gbeko ni Ile-Eko Gbogbo Imo Yunifasitu Kolumbia. Ise osere re, to gba ewadun meje, bere ni 1939 pelu Rose McClendon Players ni Harlem. O se filmu akoko re ni 1950 ninu filmu Sidney Poitier No Way Out. Ohun ni ohun Anansi alantakun lori ere telifisan awon omode Sesame Street lori PBS niti aworan alamurin re. Itokasi àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1917 Àwọn ọjọ́aláìsí ní 2005 àwọn òṣeré ará Amẹ́ríkà
__label__yo Idibo gomina ipinle Eko lodun 1999 waye ni Naijiria ni ojo kesan osu kinni odun 1999. Asiwaju Bọla Tinubu ni AD o jawe olubori ninu ibo to bori oludije PDP . Asiwaju Bola Tinubu ti di oludije ibo naa AD . Eto idibo Gómìnà ìpínlẹ̀ Èkó ma'n bo si ipo tori ètò ìdìbò púpọ̀ . Idibo alakọbẹrẹ Akọkọ AD Bola Tinubu jawe olubori ninu idibo alaabere AD. Esi Apapọ iye awọn oludibo ti o forukọsilẹ ni ipinlẹ jẹ 4,093,143. Lapapọ nọmba awọn ibo ti a sọ jẹ 1,184,372, lakoko ti nọmba awọn ibo to wulo jẹ 1,149,375. Awọn idibo ti a kọ silẹ jẹ 34,997.
__label__yo . Nínú ìmọ̀ ẹ̀yà ara ènìyàn, ẹnu ni ẹ̀yà ara àkọ́kọ́ tí ó kángun sí ona ọ̀fun tí ohun jíjẹ àti ohun mímu ń gbà kọjá, tí ó sì pèsè itọ́ fún ìrọ̀rùn ahọ́n kí ọ̀rọ̀ ó lè já geere. Gẹ́gẹ́ bí ẹ̀yà ara ìfọ̀, ẹnu ní agbára lati pèsè àti láti gba itọ́ dúró pẹ̀lú ìrànlọ́wọ́ epithelium tí ó wà nínú ẹnu. Lára iṣẹ́ rẹ̀, láti ẹnu ni iṣẹ́ dídà óúnjẹ ti bẹ̀rẹ̀. Bẹ́ẹ̀, ó tún ń ṣiṣẹ́ ìfọ̀, ọ̀rọ̀ sísọ tàbí ìbánisọ̀rọ̀ Nígbà tí àkọ́ṣe iṣẹ́ ohùn ń ti inú tááná ahọ́n , ètè àti àrùgbọ̀n nílò orísirísi ohùn àti ọ̀rọ̀. Ìpínsísọ̀rí ẹnu A lè pín ẹnu sí oríṣi ọ̀nà méjì, àkọ́kọ́ ni àbáwọlé ẹnu tí wọ́n ń pè ní (fesitibulu) àti ọ̀fun. Ìrísí rẹ̀ Ẹnu sábà ma ń yọ̀ tàbí tutù nígbà gbogbo pẹ̀lú omi ẹnu tí a mọ̀ sí itọ́. Inú ẹnu ni eyín ń gbé nígbà tí ètè sì jẹ́ ilẹ̀kùn àbáwọlé sí ẹnu àti gbogbo ẹ̀yà ara inú tó kù pátá. Àwọn Ìtọ́ka sí Ẹ̀yà ara
__label__yo Pápá ìseré Mobolaji Johnson Arena jẹ́ pápá ìseré tí ówà fún òpòlopò eré idayara ní ìlú Èkó. O jé pápá ìseré ti òpòlopò àwon egbé agbábolù ni Èkó n lò fún gbigba boolu à fesè gbá, pàápa jùlo àwon egbé Ikorodu United F.C., Stationery Stores F.C., First Bank àti Julius Berger FC. Pápá ìṣeré náà le gba egbèrún mewa(10,000) ènìyàn ó sì jẹ́ pápá ìseré tí àkókó dá ní Nàìjíríà. Pápá ìseré náà wà ní egbe Tafewa Belewa Square ní ìlú Èkó, a kó pápá ìseré náà ní 1930, odún mewa léyìn rè, a só ní orúko Oba George V. Laarin 1963 sí 1973, a bèrè sí ún pe ní pápá ìseré ilú Èkó. Wón tún padà tun kó tí wón sì tun se ní 1980s. Àwon ìtókasí
__label__yo Ibi ipamọ igbo Akure Ofosu wa ni guusu ìwọ oòrùn, ni orile ede Nàìjíríà, o si bo ẹ̀rin lé ní ẹ̀wá dín-ní-irinwó onigun mẹrin kilomita . Akure Ofosu ṣe pataki pupọ fun itoju awọn olugbe Elegbede ni Nàìjíríà. Iwadi ti a ṣe lakoko ọdun 2007 ri awọn itẹ ẹtalelọgbọn ni awọn ipo mẹrin, laisi iran taara. Itan Ti iṣeto ni ọdun 1936 ati pe o ni nkan bii irinwó onigun mẹrin kilomita (154 square miles), Reserve Forest Akure-Ofosu tun ni bode Ala, Owo, Ohosu ati '/;], papọ ti o jẹ ọkan ninu awọn agbegbe ti o tobi julọ ti igbo ti o ku ni Nigeria. Awọn igbo ti o wa laarin jẹ ile si ọpọlọpọ awọn oriṣiriṣi oriṣiriṣi, pẹlu awọn primates ti o ni ewu. Mangabeys pupa-capped ( Cercocebus torquatus ), Nigerian funfun-throated guenons ( Cercopithecus erythrogaster pococki ), putty-nosed obo ( Cercopithecus nictitans ), mona ọbọ ( Cercocebus mona ), ati awọn miran gbogbo le ṣee ri ni ohun ti o ku ti Akurest-Ofoss' . Awọn itọkasi
__label__yo Richard Nathaniel Wright (September 4, 1908 – November 28, 1960) je olukowe omo orile-ede Amerika. Itokasi àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1908 Àwọn ọjọ́aláìsí ní 1960 Àwọn olùkọ̀wé ará Amẹ́ríkà Àwọn ọmọ Áfríkà Amẹ́ríkà
__label__yo Silvestridia jẹ́ ìdílé àwọn proturan nínú ẹ̀bí Acerentomidae. Àwọn ẹ̀yà Silvestridia africana Yin & Dallai, 1985 Silvestridia artiochaeta Bonet, 1942 Silvestridia hutan Imadaté, 1965 Silvestridia keijiana Imadaté, 1965 Silvestridia solomonis (Imadaté, 1960) Àwọn ìtọ́kasí Àyọkà kúkurú
__label__yo Tracee Ellis Ross (oruko abiso Tracee Joy Silberstein; October 29, 1972) je osere, ologe, alawada ati olootu eto telifisan to gbajumo fun ere re bi Dr. Rainbow Johnson lori ere awada ile-ise telifisan ABC Black-ish. Tracee Ellis Ross je ikan ninu awon omo Diana Ross. Itokasi Àwọn òṣeré tẹlifísàn ará Amẹ́ríkà Àwọn òṣeré ará Amẹ́ríkà
__label__yo Cecilia Ngibo Nku (ti a bi ni ọjọ kerindinlogbon Oṣu Kẹwa Ọdun 1992) jẹ agbabọọlu Naijiria ti o gba fun egbe agbabọọlu Rivers Angels ti idije Awọn obinrin Naijiria . Nku gba bọọlu akọkọ rẹ ni ìdíje agbaye ni ọdun 2010 lakoko ti o nṣere fun Nigeria ni 2010 FIFA U-20 World Cup Women . Arabinrin naa wa lara ikọ agbabọọlu orilẹede Naijiria ti o bori ninu idije idije awọn obinrin ile Afirika ti ọdun 2014 ni orile-ede Namibia . Ni Oṣu Karun ọdun 2015 ni a pe Nku lati gba bọọlu fun ẹgbẹ agbabọọlu orilẹ-ede Naijiria ninu idije Ife Agbaye Awọn Obirin ti 2015 FIFA . Awọn ọlá International Nigeria Asiwaju Women ká African (1): 2014 Awọn itọkasi Ita ìjápọ Cecilia Nku at Soccerway Àwọn ènìyàn alààyè Àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1992
__label__yo Nneka Lucia Egbuna (tí a bí ní ọjọ́ kẹríndínlógún oṣù Kejìlá ọdún 1980) jẹ́ ọmọ orílẹ̀-èdè Nàìjíríà, akọrin àti òṣèré bìnrin. Ó ma ń kọrin ní, Èdè Gẹ̀ẹ́sì, Igbo àti èdè Pidgin Nàìjíríà. Ìpìlẹ̀ rẹ̀ A bí Nneka Lucia Egbuna ní Warri, Ìpínlẹ̀ Dẹ́ltà, Nàìjíríà, a sì tọ dàgbà ní ìlú kan náà, ìyá rẹ̀ jẹ́ ọmọ orílẹ̀ ède Jẹ́mánì, bàbá rẹ̀ sì jẹ́ ọmọ orílẹ̀-èdè Nàìjíríà. Òun ni àbíkẹ́yìn nínú ọmọ mẹ́rin. Nígbà tí Nneka jẹ́ ọmọ ọdún méjì, ìyá rẹ̀ fi bàbá rẹ̀ sílè. Nígbà tí bàbá rẹ̀ fẹ́ ìyàwó míràn, ìyàwó tuntun yìí fi ìyà jẹ àwọn ọmọ ìyàwó àkọ́kọ́, pàápàá jùlọ àwọn ọmọ méjì tí ó jẹ́ àbíkẹ́yìn—Nneka àti ẹ̀gbọ́n rẹ̀ ọkùnrin, Anato. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo Toka McBaror jẹ́ aṣagbátẹrù fíìmù tó jẹ́ ọmọ orílẹ̀-èdè Nàìjíríà, ó sì tún jẹ́ olùdarí fíìmù and music video director tí wọ́n bí, tí ó dàgbà, tí ó sì ń gbé ní Ìpínlẹ̀ Kaduna, ní orílẹ̀-èdè Nàìjíríà àmọ́ tí ó wà láti Ìpínlẹ̀ Delta. Ó gbà àmì-ẹ̀yẹ fún "Kada River" ní ọdún 2018 Toronto International Nollywood Film Festival ní ìlú Canada, àmì-ẹ̀yẹ mẹ́fà fún fíìmù Lotanna ní 2017 Golden Movie Awards. Ó tún gba àmì-ẹ̀yẹ fún fíìmù tó dára jù lọ, olùdarí fíìmù tó dára jù lọ, láti 2018 Toronto International Nollywood Film Festival, TINFF, tó wáyé ní Toronto, Canada. Àwọn ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck (, ojoibi 21 February 1980) ni Druk Gyalpo ile Bhutan ikarun (Oba ile Bhutan) ati olori ilé-oba Wangchuck. O gori oye ni 14 December 2006, o si gbade ni 6 November 2008. Itokasi Àwọn ará Bhùtán
__label__yo Michelle LaVaughn Robinson Obama (ọjọ́-ìbí 17 January, 1964) jẹ́ aláwọ̀dúdú ọmọ ilẹ̀ Amerika; agbẹjọ́rò ni, òhun sì ni ìyàwó Barack Obama to je Aare ile Amẹ́ríkà. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí Àwọn ọmọ Áfríkà Amẹ́ríkà
__label__yo Elfrida O. Adebo, tí orúkọ àbíso rẹ̀ jẹ́ Olaniyan (tí wọ́n sì bí ní ọdún 1928) jẹ́ ọ̀mọ̀wé àti Núrsì ọmọ orílẹ̀-èdè Nàìjíríà. Ní ọdún 1984, ó di ọ̀jọ̀gbọ́n àkọ́kọ́ nínú ìmọ̀ Núrsì ní orílẹ̀-èdè Nàìjíríà. Ìgbésí ayé rẹ̀ A bí Adebo ní ìlú Abeokuta, Ìpínlẹ̀ Ògùn, ní ọjọ́ kẹta osù kẹta ọdun 1928. Ó bèrè ipa rẹ̀ nínú iṣẹ́ Núrsì ní London, ibè ló tí kó nípa ìṣẹ́ Núrsì àti gbígbẹ̀bí ní St Mary's Hospital, London láàrin ọdún 1957 sí 1958. Ní ọdún 1959, ó padà sí Nàìjíríà láti di Núrsì ní Ibadan. O gba àmì ẹyẹ D.P.H. nínú ìmò isẹ Núrsì ní ọdun 1961, àti àmì ẹyẹ Bachelor of Nursing ní ọdún 1962. Lẹ́yìn ìgbà tí ó ṣiṣẹ́ díè gẹ́gẹ́ bi olùbádá ìmọ̀ràn ní School of Hygiene ti ìlú Ibadan, ó di olùkọ́ ní Yunifásítì ìlú Ìbàdàn. Ó dára pọ̀ mọ́ ẹ̀ka isẹ Núrsì ní oṣù Kẹ̀wá ọdún 1967, ó sì di adarí ẹ̀ka náà ní ọdún 1970. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo Florence Iweta jẹ agbabọọlu lobinrin tẹlẹ ri ti a bini 29, óṣu March ni ọdun 1983. Arabinrin naa ṣere fun team awọn obinrin naigiria ti national lori bọọlu gẹgẹbi defender. Àṣeyọri Florence jẹ àṣoju fun órilẹ ede naigiria ni olympics to waye ni ọdun 2000. Arabinrin naa tun kopa ninu Cup FIFA agbaye ni ọdun 1999 ati 2003. Elere naa wa lara team to yege ni ere idije awọn obinrin ilẹ afirica ni ọdun 2000, 2002 ati 2004. Itọkasi
__label__yo Betty Abah (bíi ni ọjọ́ kẹfà oṣù kẹta ọdún 1974) jẹ́ oníróyìn, akọ̀wé àti ajíjágbara fún àwọn ọmọdé àti àwọn obìnrin. Òun ni olùdásílẹ̀ àti adarí fún CEE HOPE ní ìlú Èkó. Ìbẹ̀rẹ̀pẹ̀pẹ̀ ayé àti ètò-ẹ̀kọ́ rẹ̀ Wọ́n bí Betty sí ìlú Otukpo ní ìpínlẹ̀ Benue. Ó gboyè nínú ẹ̀kọ́ ìmọ̀ èdè gẹ̀ẹ́sì láti ilé ẹ̀kọ́ gíga tí University of Calabar, ó sì tẹ̀síwájú nínú ẹ̀kọ́ náà ni University of Lagos. Iṣẹ́ Ó bẹ̀rẹ̀ iṣẹ́ pẹ̀lú ilé iṣẹ́ tí ó ń ṣe ìwé ìròyìn tí The Voice Newspaper ni ìpínlẹ̀ Benue. Ó ti ṣiṣé pẹlú àwọn ìwé ìròyìn bíi Newswatch, Tell Magazine àti Rocky Mountain news. Ó ti kọ àwọn ìwé bíi Sound of Broken Chains, Go Tell Our King àti Mother of Multitude. Ó dá ẹgbẹ́ CEE-HOPE kalẹ̀ ni oṣù kejìlá ọdún 2013. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo Eti Okun Elegushi jẹ eti okun ikọkọ ti o wa ni Lekki, ipinlẹ Eko, guusu iwọ-oorun Naijiria . Etikun naa jẹ ti idile ọba Elegushi ni Lekki, ipinlẹ Eko. okun Elegushi aladani eti okun ti wa ni ti ri bi ọkan ninu awọn ti o dara ju etikun ni Lagos ati Nigeria ni o tobi. Awọn eti okun ṣe ere isunmọ si awọn alejo 40,000 ni gbogbo ọsẹ pẹlu awọn ọjọ Aiku jẹ ọjọ ti o dara julọ ni eti okun. Ju idaji ninu gbogbo awọn alejo ti o ti wa ni ere lori eti okun ibewo osẹ-ọjọ Sunday. Iwe iwọle ẹnu-ọna wọn wa ni oṣuwọn alapin 2000 naira ṣugbọn o le jẹ ẹdinwo ti o ba ni bi ẹgbẹ kan. Imudani IG osise wọn le ṣee lo lati de ọdọ wọn. Awọn itọkasi
__label__yo Labrador je agbegbe lariwa oto ninu igberiko Newfoundland àti Labrador ti orile-ede Kánádà. O ni apa to wa lorile igberiko yi, to je yiyasoto lodo erekusu Newfoundland pelu Strait of Belle Isle. Itokasi Kánádà
__label__yo Rafael Francisco Alburquerque De Castro (ojoibi 14 June 1940, ni Santo Domingo) ni Igbakeji Aare orile-ede Dominiki Olominira, labe Aare Leonel Fernández, lati August 2004 to si je titundiboyan ni May 2008. O bura si ise ni 16 August 2008. Itokasi àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1940 Àwọn ará Dómíníkì Olómìnira
__label__yo Vidiadhar Surajprasad Naipaul, TC (ojoibi 17 August 1932), to gbajuo bi V. S. Naipaul ati nigba miran bi Sir Vidia Naipaul, je olukowe ara Trinidad to je wa lati India to gbajumo fun awon iwe aroso re to dalori awon orile-ede tiundagbasoke. Fun awon ifihan ohun ti Akademi Swedin pe ni “awon itan adepamo,” Naipaul gba won Ebun Nobel fun Litireso ni 2001. He has been called "a master of modern English prose." O ti gba opolopo ebun alamookomooka, ninu won ni John Llewellyn Rhys Prize (1958), the Somerset Maugham Award (1960), the Hawthornden Prize (1964), the W. H. Smith Literary Award (1968), the Booker Prize (1971), ati David Cohen Prize fun ipa igbesiaye ninu Imookomooka Britani (1993). Ni 2008, The Times fi Naipaul sipo keje lori atojo won fun "Awon olukowe Britani 50 titobijulo lati 1945". Itokasi Àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1932 Àwọn ará Trínídád àti Tòbágò Àwọn ẹlẹ́bùn Nobel nínú Lítíréṣọ̀ Àwọn ẹlẹ́bùn Nobel ará Brítánì
__label__yo Central African mangroves ecoregion kún fún agbègbè ńlá tí o ní mangroveswamp ní orílè èdè Africa, tí ó wà ní coasts of West Africa pàápàá jù lọ ní orílẹ̀ èdè Nigeria. A máa ń ṣe àwárí àwọn mangroves yí ní ẹnu odò Ọlọ́rà àti odò ńlá, ó sì kún fún igi tí ó ga tó 45m. Ọ̀pọ̀lọpọ̀ igi bẹẹ wà ní orílẹ̀ èdè Nigeria, pàápàá jù lọ ní agbègbè Cameroon àti Equatorial Guinea/Gabonand patches ní Ghana, Democratic Republic of Congo àti northern Angola. Agbègbè tó tóbi jù ní ìgbèríko tí ó wà ní delta tí Niger Riveron the Gulf of Guinea, Èyí tó kù wa ní eastern side tí Cross River delta ní orílẹ̀ èdè Nigeria àti Cameroon, the Wouri estuary ní Cameroon àti Muni River estuary ní border tí Equatorial Guinea àti Gabon pẹlu the ẹnu odò Congo.
__label__yo Osù Ọ̀pẹ nínú ònkà oṣù ojú ọ̀run Yorùbá ni ó jẹ́ oṣù Kejìlá nínú ònkà oṣù ojú ọ̀run ti àwọn (Gẹ̀ẹ́sì) tí wọ́n pè ní December Ọjọ́ mọ́kànlélọ́gbọ̀n ni ó wà nínú oṣù yí. Osù December ni awọn gẹ̀ẹ́sì fa orúkọ rẹ̀ yọ látara ọ̀rọ̀ ""decem" (tí ó túmọ̀ sí ten) nítorí wípé òun gaan ni oṣù kẹwàá ọdún nínú kalẹ̀dà tí àwọn calendar of Romulus tí ìbẹ̀rẹ̀ oṣù tiwọn sì bẹ̀rẹ̀ ní oṣù kẹta ọdún. Àwọn oṣù tókù kò ti sí tẹ́lẹ̀, amọ́ wọ́n ṣàfikún oṣú kínní ati oṣù kejì kun tí December sì dá dúró ní tirẹ̀. Àwọn ìtọ́ka sí
__label__yo ni akoole ninu ISO 3166-2, apa opagun ISO 3166 ti International Organization for Standardization (ISO) tejadesiwe to setumo awon amioro fun oruko awon ipinsabe koko awon orile-ede Solomon Islands. Itokasi ISO 3166
__label__yo Bi orile-ede sosialisti tabi orile-ede olusalawujo (tabi orile-ede olominira sosialisti, orile-ede awon osise tabi) le ni orisirisi awon itumo ti won baramu. Itokasi Ìṣesósíálístì Àwọn orílẹ̀-èdè sósíálístì
__label__yo Alphonse Hercule Matam (ti a bi ni ọjọ kini oṣu Kẹrin ọdun 1973) jẹ agbẹru iwuwo ara orilẹ-ede Kamẹru. O dije ninu ipele iwuwo ina ti awọn ọkunrin nn Olimpiiki Igba ooru 1992 . Awọn itọkasi Àwọn ènìyàn alààyè Àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1973
__label__yo Ilé ìkàwé orílẹ̀ èdè Cameroon jẹ́ ilẹ̀ ìkàwé àgbà ti orílẹ̀ èdè Cameroon (Bibliothèque nationale du Cameroun). Wọ́n da kalẹ̀ ní ọdún 1966, ó sì wà ní Yaoundé. Gégé bí àjọ United Nations ṣe fi léde, ní ọdún 2010, ìdá ọ̀kànléládọ́ta nínú ọgọ́rùn-ún(71%) àwọn ọmọ orílẹ̀ èdè ni ó le kàwé tí ó sì le kọ. Àwọn Ìtọ́kasí
__label__yo The AK-47 is a selective-fire, gas-operated 7.62×39mm assault rifle, first developed in the USSR by Mikhail Kalashnikov. It is officially known as Avtomat Kalashnikova (). It is also known as a Kalashnikov, an "AK", or in Russian slang, Kalash. Itoka Àwọn ìbọn
__label__yo Banga Rice jẹ́ ọ̀kan lára àwọn iresi ní Nàìjíríà tí wón fi eyín àti ọbẹ̀ ẹ̀yìn se. Àwọn ẹ̀yà Urhobo ní apa gúúsù Nàìjíríà ni wọ́n má ń sábà sè é. Banga túmọ̀ sí omi tí wọ́n ba yọ lára eyìn. Wọ́n ń pe ní iresi banga nítorí bí wọ́n bá ti fún omi jáde lara eyìn tán, wọ́n ó fi se iresi. Àwọn ẹ̀yà urhobo kì í fi èròjà bí; Taiko, Benetientien, tàbí Rogoje sí Banga Rice wọn bí wọ́n se ń fi sí ọbẹ̀ Banga wọn. Àwọn Ìtókasí
__label__yo Peter "Pete" Sampras (; ojoibi August 12, 1971) ni ara Amerika to ungba tenis to ti feyinti ati eni ipo No. 1 Lagbaye tele. Nigba odun 14 to fi gba tenis ATP, o gba ife-eye Grand Slam 14 awon enikan besini o je gbigba bi ikan ninu awon agba tenis to lokiki julo lailai. Itokasi Àwọn agbá tẹ́nìs ará Amẹ́ríkà Àwọn ayọrí Open Amẹ́ríkà Àwọn ayọrí Open Austrálíà Àwọn ayọrí Ìdíje Wimbledon
__label__yo Jean Edmond Dujardin (; born 19 June 1972) je osere, oludari filmu, atokun ati alawada ara Fransi to gba Ebun Akademi fun Okunrin Osere didarajulo 2011. Itokasi Àwọn òṣeré fílmù ará Fránsì Àwọn ẹlẹ́bùn Akádẹ́mì Okùnrin Òṣeré Dídárajùlọ 1k Àwọn aláwàdà ará Fránsí Àwọn olùdarí fílmù ará Fránsí Àwọn atọ́kùn fílmù ará Fránsí Àwọn òṣeré tẹlifísàn ará Fránsì
__label__yo Ijeoma Balogun je onise iroyin nipa igbesi aye. Osi tun je oludasile ati alase ile ise Redrick Public Relations. Ijeoma Balogun je alara to logbon pelu opolopo iriri aye. Omu ka ko ise ribiribi lokunkundun. Fun ti eroungba ise laye, pelu okan pataki lara imu idagbasoke ba eso fun eyan ni ile Naijiria. Awon itokasi
__label__yo George Kunda (ojoibi February 26, 1956 ni Luanshya) je oloselu ara Zambia. Lowolowo Kunda ni Igbakeji Aare ile Sambia lati 2008 labe Aare Rupiah Banda. References Biographical article on Kunda Àwọn igbákejì ààrẹ ilẹ̀ Sámbíà
__label__yo Manouchka Kelly Labouba jẹ́ olùdarí eré, olùgbéré-jáde àti ònkọ̀tàn ọmọ́ orílẹ̀-èdè Gàbọ̀n tó maá n sábà daŕi àwọn eré oníṣókí. Ó ti ṣe ọ̀pọ̀lọpọ̀ àwọn eré oníṣókí, lára wọn ni Marty et la tendre dame, Le guichet automatique àti Le divorce. Ó tún maá ṣiṣẹ́ gẹ́gẹ́ bi olóòtú sinimá àti olùyàwòrán. Àwọ́n ìtọ́kasí Àwọn ìtakùn Ìjásóde Interview de Manouchka Kelly Labouba 1 Interview de Manouchka Kelly Labouba 2 Manouchka Kelly Labouba publications Àwọn ènìyàn alààyè
__label__yo Carl Kerindinlogun Gustaf (oruko abiso: Carl Gustaf Folke Hubertus, ojoibi 30 April 1946) lo je Oba ile Swidin lati 15 September 1973, nigbati baba-baba re Gustaf Kefa Adolf ku. Ohun nikan ni omokunrin baba re Prince Gustaf Adolf, Duke of Västerbotten to sologbe , ati iya re Princess Sibylla of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. Baba re Gustaf Adolf ku ninu ijamba baalu losan ojo 26 January 1947, ni Papa Oko-ofurufu Copenhagen ni Denmark. Unlike many other European monarchs who have extensive styles, King Carl Gustaf's formal and complete style is simply His Majesty Carl XVI Gustaf, King of Sweden. The King's heir apparent, upon passage on 1 January 1980 of a new law establishing equal primogeniture (the first such law passed in European history), is Crown Princess Victoria, the eldest child of the King and his wife, Queen Silvia. Itokasi àwọn ọjọ́ìbí ní 1946 Àwọn Ọba ilẹ̀ Swídìn
__label__yo Mo gbàwé kan.
__label__yo Ẹṣin náà jẹ́ funfun.
__label__yo Mo wá síléèwé wọkọ̀ kẹ̀kẹ́.
__label__yo Ó lọ sọ́jà.
__label__yo Ọ̀rẹ́ rẹ̀ ni mi.
__label__yo Ṣé mo ní láti lọ síbẹ̀?
__label__yo Agogo mejila ọsan.
__label__yo Mo ń kọ́ èdè Yorùbá.
__label__yo Omi ni ayé.
__label__yo Kọ̀ǹpútà mi ni.
__label__yo Mo mu tíì.
__label__yo Mo ń lọ Àpápá.
__label__yo Tom ko fó nkan kan
__label__yo Mo ń kàwé.
__label__yo Onísègùn ni ẹ́.
__label__yo N kò fẹ́ lọ síléèwé.
__label__yo Bẹ́ẹ̀ni.
__label__yo Ó fẹ́ kẹ̀kẹ́.
__label__yo Ó jẹun.
__label__yo Àpótí ni.
__label__yo Ẹyẹ mi ńkọrin.
__label__yo N kò fẹ́ ọ̀gẹ̀dẹ̀.
__label__yo oji igbesi ayemi, Charles
__label__yo Ó wá láti Èkó.
__label__yo Ìyàwó mi lọ sí oko.
__label__yo Lọ́jọ́ jímọ̀ la lọ sí mọ́ṣálásí.
__label__yo Ó lọ lánà.
__label__yo Ẹ rọra.
__label__yo Mo ràwé náà.
__label__yo Gidi gan?
__label__yo Gbọ́njú mọ̀ wá púpọ̀.
__label__yo Mo ní ọmọ mẹ́ta.
__label__yo N kò mọ̀ èdè Yorùbá.
__label__yo Ìwọ ta ni?
__label__yo Kí l'o fẹ́?
__label__yo Wọn kò dára púpọ̀.
__label__yo Ta nìyí?
__label__yo A dúpẹ́.
__label__yo Ṣ'ẹ́ tọ̀bẹ náà?
__label__yo Ta ni Emily?
__label__yo Ṣ'o tàwé náà?
__label__yo A fẹ́ àwọn ọ̀rọ̀ ní gbólóhùn pípé.
__label__yo Mo ńṣe iṣẹ́ àṣetiléwá mi.
__label__yo Orí ńfọ́.
__label__yo Ó yà mí l'ẹ́nu.
__label__yo Wọ́n wá lọ̀já.
__label__yo Ta l'ó ńmu ọtí bíà?
__label__yo Mo lọ sílé ìtajà oúnjẹ.
__label__yo Amẹ́ríkà ni wá.
__label__yo A ragbọ̀n yìí.
__label__yo Mo fẹ́ ṣòkòtò.
__label__yo Orúkọ mi ni Jack.
__label__yo Níbo lò ńlọ?
__label__yo Ṣé o lọ sọjà ni àna?
__label__yo Mo lọ sódò.
__label__yo Ẹṣin náà kìí ṣe funfun.
__label__yo Orí ńfọ́ wa.
__label__yo Mi ò fẹ́ lọ sí ilé-ẹ́kọ́.
__label__yo Ẹṣin jẹ́ funfun.
__label__yo Àwọn erékùṣù wà ní òkun.
__label__yo A lọ s'ọ́jà.
__label__yo Bawo ni?
__label__yo Mo rà fìlà.
__label__yo Mo kàwé náà.
__label__yo Ṣ'o fẹ́ jẹun adìẹ?
__label__yo Mo nlọ s'étí òkun.
__label__yo Ó dáhùn ìbéèré náà.
__label__yo N kò rí ẹ.
__label__yo Mo ní àwọn arákunrin.
__label__yo Mo ní ẹja méjì.
__label__yo Ọmọ Èkó ni mí.
__label__yo Mo fẹ́ rà ìwé.
__label__yo Ẹṣin yìí jẹ́ funfun.
__label__yo Onísègùn ni mí.
__label__yo Ẹṣin kìí ṣe funfun.
__label__yo Orí ńfọ́ mi.
__label__yo Burj Khalifa je agbar tó ga ju ni gbògbó ayè.
__label__yo Kẹ̀kẹ́ mi ni.
__label__yo Mo lọ sí mọ́ṣálásí lọ́jọ́ jímọ̀.
__label__yo Mo lọ s'ọ́jà.
__label__yo Ó jẹ́ ọmọ ilẹ̀ Potogí.
__label__yo Ẹ káàárọ̀!
__label__yo Ilé wà dáadáa.
__label__yo Jack lorúkọ mi.
__label__yo Mo lọ síléèwé.
__label__yo Owó rẹ̀ wà ní bánkì.
__label__yo Ẹṣin yìí kìí ṣe funfun.
__label__yo Onísègùn ni.
__label__yo Onísègùn ni wá.
__label__yo Mo ní ológbò méjì.
__label__yo Èmi yóò dìde nísinsin yìí, èmi yóò sì rìn lọ káàkiri ìlú, ní àwọn òpópónà àti ní àwọn gbangba òde; Èmi yóò wá ẹni tí ọkàn mi fẹ́.
__label__yo Ẹ̀gbẹ́ táa máa fi sùn lálẹ́, kò yẹ ká fi gbọgbẹ́ lọ́ọ̀sán.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ láti jẹ́ ọmọ orílẹ̀‐èdè kan.
__label__yo A kò lè ṣàdédé gba ẹ̀tọ́ jíjẹ́ ọmọ orílẹ̀‐èdè ẹni lọ́wọ́ ẹnìkẹ́ni láìnídìí tàbí kí a kọ̀ fún ẹnìkẹ́ni láti yàn láti jẹ́ ọmọ orílẹ̀‐èdè mìíràn.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ láti gba iye owó tí ó dọ́gba fún irú iṣẹ́ kan náà, láìsí ìyàsọ́tọ̀ kankan.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ tó dọ́gba láti ṣe iṣẹ́ ìjọba ní orílẹ̀‐èdè rẹ̀.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ láti wá ààbò àti láti jẹ àn fàní ààbò yìí ní orílẹ̀‐èdè mìíràn nígbà tí a bá ń ṣe inúnibíni sí i.
__label__yo A kò lè ṣàdédé gba ohun ìní ẹnì kan lọ́wọ́ rẹ̀ láìnídìí.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ láti kópa nínú ìṣàkóso orílẹ̀‐èdè rẹ̀, yálà fúnra rẹ̀ tàbí nípasẹ̀ àwọn aṣojú tí a kò fi ipá yàn.
__label__yo Bí ó ti jẹ́ pé ó ṣe pàtàkì kí ìdàgbàsókè ìbáṣepọ̀ ti ọ̀rẹ́‐sí‐ọ̀rẹ́ wà láàrin àwọn orílẹ̀‐èdè,
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ sí ìsinmi àti fàájì pẹ̀lú àkókò tí kò pọ̀ jù lẹ́nu iṣẹ́ àti àsìkò ìsinmi lẹ́nu iṣẹ́ láti ìgbà dé ìgbà tí a ó sanwó fún.
__label__yo A kò gbọdọ̀ lo àwọn ẹ̀tọ́ àti òmìnira wọ̀nyí rárá, ní ọ̀nà yòówù kó jẹ́, tó bá lòdì sí àwọn ète àti ìgbékalẹ̀ Ajọ‐àpapọ̀ orílẹ̀‐èdè agbáyé.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ sí ààbò àn fàní ìmọyì àti ohun ìní tí ó jẹ yọ láti inú iṣẹ́ yòówù tí ó bá ṣe ìbáà ṣe ìmọ̀ sáyẹ́n sì, ìwé kíkọ tàbí iṣẹ́ ọnà.
__label__yo A kò gbọdọ̀ mú ẹnikẹ́ni ní ẹrú tàbí kí a mú un sìn; ẹrú níní àti ò wò ẹrú ni a gbọdọ̀ fi òfin dè ní gbogbo ọ̀nà.
__label__yo Àwọn òbí ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ tó ga jù lọ láti yan ẹ̀kọ́ tí wọ́n bá fẹ́ fún àwọn ọmọ wọn.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní àwọn ojúṣe kan sí àwùjọ, nípasẹ̀ èyí tí ó fi lè ṣeé ṣe fún ẹni náà láti ní ìdàgbàsókè kíkún gẹ́gẹ́ bí ẹ̀dá ènìyàn.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ láti dá ẹgbẹ́ òṣìṣẹ́ sílẹ̀ àti láti dara pọ̀ mọ́ irú ẹgbẹ; bẹ́ẹ̀ láti dáàbò bo àwọn ohun tí ó jẹ ẹ́ lógún.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ láti kúrò lórílẹ̀‐èdè yòówù kó jẹ́, tó fi mọ́ orílẹ̀‐èdè tirẹ̀, kí ó sì tún padà sí orílẹ̀‐èdè tirẹ̀ nígbà tó bá wù ú.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ láti wà láàyè, ẹ̀tọ́ sí òmìnira àti ẹ̀tọ́ sí ààbò ara rẹ̀.
__label__yo Ẹbí jẹ́ ìpìlẹ̀ pàtàkì àdánidá ní àwùjọ, ó sì ní ẹ̀tọ́ pé kí àwùjọ àti orílẹ̀‐èdè ó dáàbò bò ó.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ láti dá ohun ìní ara rẹ̀ ní tàbí láti ní in papọ̀ pẹ̀lú àwọn mìíràn.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ sí òmìnira láti pé jọ pọ̀ àti láti dara pọ̀ mọ́ àwọn mìíràn ní àlàáfíà.
__label__yo A kò gbọdọ̀ dá ẹnì kẹ́ni lóró tàbí kí a lò ó ní ìlò ìkà tí kò yẹ ọmọ ènìyàn tàbí ìlò tó lè tàbùkù ẹ̀dá ènìyàn.
__label__yo A kò gbọdọ̀ ṣàdédé fi òfin mú ènìyàn tàbí kí a kàn gbé ènìyàn tì mọ́lé, tàbí kí a lé ènìyàn jáde ní ìlú láìnídìí.
__label__yo Bí ó ti jẹ́ pé ó ṣe pàtàkì kí a dáàbò bo àwọn ẹ̀tó ọmọnìyàn lábẹ́ òfin, bí a kò bá fẹ́ ti àwọn ènìyàn láti kọjú ìjà sí ìjọba ipá àti ti amúnisìn, nígbà tí kò bá sí ọ̀nà àbáyọ mìíràn fún wọn láti bèèrè ẹ̀tọ́ wọn,
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan tí ó bá ń ṣisẹ́ ní ẹ̀tọ́ láti gba owó oṣù tí ó tọ́ tí yóò sì tó fún òun àti ẹbí rẹ̀ láti gbé ayé tí ó bu iyì kún ènìyàn; a sì lè fi kún owó yìí nípasẹ̀ oríṣìí àwọn ètò ìrànlọ́wọ́ mìíràn nígbà tí ó bá ye.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ láti gbé ìgbé ayé tó bójú mu nínú èyí tí òun àti ẹbí rẹ̀ yóò wà ní ìlera àti àlàáfíà, tí wọn yóò sì ní oúnjẹ, aṣọ, ilégbèé, àti àn fàní fún ìwòsàn àti gbogbo ohun tó lè mú ẹ̀dá gbé ìgbé ayé rere. Bákan náà, ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló tún ní ààbò nígbà àìníṣẹ́lọ́wọ́, nígbà àìsà n, nígbà tó bá di aláàbọ̀‐ara, ní ipò opó, nígbà ogbó rẹ̀ tàbí ìgbà mìíràn tí ènìyàn kò ní ọ̀nà láti rí oúnjẹ òò jọ́, tí eléyìí kì í sì í ṣe ẹ̀bi olúwa rẹ̀.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan lórílẹ̀‐èdè, ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ sí àtúnṣe tó jọjú ní ilé‐ẹjọ́ fún ìwà tó lòdì sí ẹ̀tọ́ ọmọnìyàn, tó jẹ́ kò‐ṣeé‐má‐nìí gẹ́gẹ́ bó ṣe wà lábẹ́ òfin àti bí òfin‐ìpìlẹ̀ ṣe là á sílẹ̀.
__label__yo Gbogbo ènìyàn ni a bí ní òmìnira; iyì àti ẹ̀tọ́ kọ̀ọ̀kan sì dọ́gba. Wọ́n ní ẹ̀bùn ti làákàyè àti ti ẹ̀rí‐ọkàn, ó sì yẹ kí wọn ó máa hùwà sí ara wọn gẹ́gẹ́ bí ọmọ ìyá.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ànfàní sí gbogbo ẹ̀tọ́ àti òmìnira tí a ti gbé kalẹ̀ nínú ìkéde yìí láìfi ti ọ̀rọ̀ ìyàtọ̀ ẹ̀yà kankan ṣe; ìyàtọ̀ bí i ti ẹ̀yà ènìyàn, àwọ̀, akọ‐n̄‐bábo, èdè, ẹ̀sìn, ètò ìṣèlú tàbí ìyàtọ̀ nípa èrò ẹni, orílẹ̀‐èdè ẹni, orírun ẹni, ohun ìní ẹni, ìbí ẹni tàbí ìyàtọ̀ mìíràn yòówù kó jẹ́. Síwájú sí i, a kò gbọdọ̀ ya ẹnìkẹ́ni sọ́tọ̀ nítorí irú ìjọba orílẹ̀‐èdè rẹ̀ ní àwùjọ àwọn orílẹ̀‐èdè tàbí nítorí ètò‐ìṣèlú tàbí ètò‐ìdájọ́ orílẹ̀‐èdè rẹ̀; orílẹ̀‐èdè náà ìbáà wà ní òmìnira tàbí kí ó wà lábẹ́ ìṣàkóso ilẹ̀ mìíràn, wọn ìbáà má dàá ìjọba ara wọn ṣe tàbí kí wọ́n wà lábẹ́ ìkáni‐lápá‐kò yòówù tí ìbáà fẹ́ dí òmìnira wọn lọ́wọ́ gẹ́gẹ́ bí orílẹ̀‐èdè.
__label__yo Bí ó ti jẹ́ pé àìka àwọn ẹ̀tọ́ ọmọnìyàn sí àti ìkẹ́gàn àwọn ẹ̀tọ́ wọ̀nyí ti ṣe okùnfà fún àwọn ìwà búburú kan, tó mú ẹ̀rí‐ọkàn ẹ̀dá gbọgbẹ́, tó sì jẹ́ pé ìbẹ̀rẹ̀ ìgbé ayé titun, nínú èyí tí àwọn ènìyàn yóò ti ní òmìnira òrọ̀ sísọ àti òmìnira láti gba ohun tó bá wù wọ́n gbọ́, òmìnira lọ́wọ́ ẹ̀rù àti òmìnira lọ́wọ́ àìní, ni a ti kà sí àníyàn tó ga jù lọ lọ́kàn àwọn ọmọ‐èniyàn,
__label__yo Bí ó ti jẹ́ pé ṣíṣe àkíyèsí iyì tó jẹ́ àbímọ́ fún ẹ̀dá àti ìdọ́gba ẹ̀tọ́ ṭí kò ṣeé mú kúrò tí ẹ̀dá kọ̀ọ̀kan ní, ni òkúta ìpìlẹ̀ fún òmìnira, ìdájọ́ òdodo àti àlàáfíà lágbàáyé,
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ láti kọ́ ẹ̀kọ́. Ó kéré tán, ẹ̀kọ́ gbọdọ̀ jẹ́ ọ̀fẹ́ ní àwọn ilé‐ẹ̀kọ́ alákọ̀ọ́bẹ̀rẹ̀. Ẹkọ́ ní ilé‐ẹ̀kọ́ alákọ̀ọ́bẹ̀rẹ̀ yìí sì gbọdọ̀ jẹ́ dandan. A gbọdọ̀ pèsè ẹ̀kọ́ iṣẹ́‐ọwọ́, àti ti ìmọ̀‐ẹ̀rọ fún àwọn ènìyàn lápapọ̀. Àn fàní tó dọ́gba ní ilé‐ẹ̀kọ́ gíga gbọdọ̀ wà ní àrọ́wọ́tó gbogbo ẹni tó bá tọ́ sí.
__label__yo Gbogbo ènìyàn ló dọ́gba lábẹ́ òfin. Wọ́n sì ní ẹ̀tọ́ sí àà bò lábẹ́ òfin láìsí ìyàsọ́tọ̀ kankan. Gbogbo ènìyàn ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ sí ààbò tó dọ́gba kúrò lọ́wọ́ ìyàsọ́tọ̀ yòówù tí ìbáà lòdì sí ìkéde yìí àti ẹ̀tọ́ kúrò lọ́wọ́ gbogbo ohun tó bá lè ti ènìyàn láti ṣe irú ìyàsọ́tọ̀ bẹ́ẹ̀.
__label__yo A kò gbọdọ̀ túmọ̀ ohunkóhun nínú ìkéde yìí gẹ́gẹ́ bí ohun tí ó fún orílẹ̀‐èdè kan tàbí àkójọpọ̀ àwọn ènìyàn kan tàbí ẹnìkẹ́ni ní ẹ̀tọ́ láti ṣe ohunkóhun tí yóò mú ìparun bá èyíkéyìí nínú àwọn ẹ̀tọ́ àti òmìnira tí a kéde yìí.
__label__yo Àpapọ̀ ìgbìmọ̀ Àjọ‐ìsọ̀kan orílẹ̀‐èdè àgbáyé ṣe ìkéde káríayé ti ẹ̀tọ́ ọmọnìyàn, gẹ́gẹ́ bí ohun àfojúsùn tí gbogbo ẹ̀dá àti orílẹ̀‐èdè jọ ń lépa lọ́nà tó jẹ́ pé ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan àti ẹ̀ka kọ̀ọ̀kan láwùjọ yóò fi ìkéde yìí sọ́kàn, tí wọn yóò sì rí i pé àwọn lo ètò‐ìkọ́ni àti ètò‐ẹ̀kọ́ láti ṣe ìgbélárugẹ ìbọ̀wọ̀ fún ẹ̀tọ́ àti òmìnira wọ̀nyí. Bákan náà, a gbọdọ̀ rí àwọn ìgbésẹ̀ tí ó lè mú ìlọsíwájú bá orílẹ̀‐èdè kan ṣoṣo tàbí àwọn orílẹ̀‐èdè sí ara wọn, kí a sì rí i pé a fi ọ̀wọ̀ tó jọjú wọ àwọn òfin wọ̀nyí, kí àmúlò wọn sì jẹ́ káríayé láàrin àwọn ènìyàn orílẹ̀‐èdè tó jẹ́ ọmọ Àjọ‐ìsọ̀kan àgbáyé fúnra wọn àti láàrin àwọn ènìyàn orílẹ̀‐èdè mìíràn tó wà lábẹ́ àṣẹ wọn.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan tí a bá fi ẹ̀sùn kàn ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ tó dọ́gba, tó sì kún, láti ṣàlàyé ara rẹ̀ ní gban̄gba, níwájú ilé‐ẹjọ́ tí kò ṣègbè, kí wọn lè ṣe ìpinnu lórí ẹ̀tọ́ àti ojúṣe rẹ̀ nípa irú ẹ̀sùn ọ̀ràn dídá tí a fi kàn án.
__label__yo Bí ó ti jẹ́ pé gbogbo ọmọ Àjọ‐ìsọ̀kan orílẹ̀‐èdè àgbáyé tún ti tẹnu mọ́ ìpinnu tí wọ́n ti ṣe tẹ́lẹ̀ nínú ìwé àdéhùn wọn, pé àwọn ní ìgbàgbọ́ nínú ẹ̀tọ́ ọmọnìyàn tó jẹ́ kò‐ṣeé‐má‐nìí, ìgbàgbọ́ nínú iyì àti ẹ̀yẹ ẹ̀dá ènìyàn, àti ìgbàgbọ́ nínú ìdọ́gba ẹ̀tọ́ láàrin ọkùnrin àti obìnrin, tó sì jẹ́ pé wọ́n tún ti pinnu láti ṣe ìgbélárugẹ ìtẹ̀síwájú àwùjọ nínú èyí tí òmìnira ètò ìgbé‐ayé rere ẹ̀dá ti lè gbòòrò sí i,
__label__yo A kò gbọdọ̀ dá ẹ̀bi ẹ̀ṣẹ̀ fún ẹnìkẹ́ni fún pé ó hu ìwà kan tàbí pé ó ṣe àwọn àfojúfò kàn nígbà tó jẹ́ pé lásìkò tí èyí ṣẹlẹ̀, irú ìwà bẹ́ẹ̀ tàbí irú àfojúfò bẹ́ẹ̀ kò lòdì sí òfin orílẹ̀‐èdè ẹni náà tàbí òfin àwọn orílẹ̀‐èdè àgbáyé mìíràn. Bákan náà, ìjẹníyà tí a lè fún ẹni tó dẹ́ṣẹ̀ kò gbọdọ̀ ju èyí tó wà ní ìmúlò ní àsìkò tí ẹni náà dá ẹ̀ṣẹ̀ rẹ̀.
__label__yo Ohun tí yóò jẹ́ ète ẹ̀kọ́ ni láti mú ìlọsíwájú tó péye bá ẹ̀dá ènìyàn, kí ó sì túbọ̀ rí i pé àwọn ènìyàn bọ̀wọ̀ fún ẹ̀tọ́ ọmọnìyàn àti àwọn òmìnira wọn, tó jẹ́ kò‐ṣeé‐má‐nìí. E tò ẹ̀kọ́ gbọdọ̀ lè rí i pé ẹ̀mí; ìgbọ́ra‐ẹni‐yé, ìbágbépọ̀ àlàáfíà, àti ìfẹ́ ọ̀rẹ́‐sí‐ọ̀rẹ́ wà láàrin orílẹ̀‐èdè, láàrin ẹ̀yà kan sí òmíràn àti láàrin ẹlẹ́sìn kan sí òmíràn. E tò‐ẹ̀kọ́ sì gbọdọ̀ kún àwọn akitiyan Àjọ‐ìsọ̀kan orílẹ̀‐èdè àgbáyé lọ́wọ́ láti rí i pé àlàáfíà fìdí múlẹ̀.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan gẹ́gẹ́ bí ẹ̀yà nínú àwùjọ ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ sí ìdáàbò bò láti ọwọ́ ìjọba àti láti jẹ́ àn fà ní àwọn ẹ̀tọ́ tí ó bá ọrọ̀‐ajé, ìwà láwùjọ àti àṣà àbínibí mu; àwọn ẹ̀tọ́ tí ó jẹ́ kò‐ṣeé‐má‐nìí fún iyì àti ìdàgbàsókè ẹ̀dá ènìyàn, nípa akitiyan nínú orílẹ̀‐èdè àti ìfọwọ́ṣowọ́ pọ̀ láàrin àwọn orílẹ̀‐èdè ní ìbámu pẹ̀lú ètò àti ohun àlùmọ́nì orílẹ̀‐èdè kọ̀ọ̀kan.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ pé kí a má ṣàdédé ṣe àyọjúràn sí ọ̀rọ̀ ìgbésí ayé rẹ̀, tàbí sí ọ̀rọ̀ẹbí rẹ̀ tàbí sí ọ̀rọ̀ ìdílé rẹ̀ tàbí ìwé tí a kọ sí i; a kò sì gbọdọ̀ ba iyì àti orúkọ rẹ̀ jẹ́. Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ sí ààbò lábẹ́ òfin kúrò lọ́wọ́ irú àyọjúràn tàbí ìbanijẹ́ bẹ́ẹ̀.
__label__yo Bí ó ti jẹ́ pé àwọn ọmọ ẹgbẹ́ Àjọ‐ìsọ̀kan orílẹ̀‐èdè àgbáyé ti jẹ́jẹ̀ẹ́ láti fọwọ́ṣowọ́ pọ̀ pẹ̀lú Àjọ náà, kí won lè jọ ṣe àṣeyege nípa àmúṣẹ àwọn ẹ̀tọ́ ọmọnìyàn àti òmìnira ẹ̀dá tó jẹ́ kò‐ṣeé‐má‐nìí àti láti rí i pé à ń bọ̀wọ̀ fún àwọn ẹ̀tọ́ náà káríayé,
__label__yo O fin yóò de ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan láti fi ọ̀wọ̀ àti ìmọyì tí ó tọ́ fún ẹ̀tọ́ àti òmìnira àwọn ẹlòmíràn nígbà tí ẹni náà bá ń lo àwọn ẹ̀tọ́ àti òmìnira ara rẹ̀. E yí wà ní ìbámu pẹ̀lú ọ̀nà tó yẹ, tó sì tọ́ láti fi báni lò nínú àwùjọ fún ire àti àlàáfíà àwùjọ náà nínú èyí tí ìjọba yóò wà lọ́wọ́ gbogbo ènìyàn.
__label__yo Tọkùnrin tobìnrin tó bá ti bàlágà ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ láti fẹ́ ara wọn, kí wọ́n sì dá ẹbí ti wọn sílẹ̀ láìsí ìkanilápá‐kò kankan nípa ẹ̀yà wọn, tàbí orílẹ̀‐èdè wọn tàbí ẹ̀sìn wọn. Ẹtọ́ wọn dọ́gba nínú ìgbeyàwó ìbáà jẹ́ nígbà tí wọn wà papọ̀ tàbí lẹ́yìn tí wọ́n bá kọ ara wọn.
__label__yo Ẹnìkẹ́ni tí a fi ẹ̀sùn kàn ni a gbọdọ̀ gbà wí pé ó jàrè títí ẹ̀bi rẹ̀ yóò fi hàn lábẹ́ òfin nípasẹ̀ ìdájọ́ tí a ṣe ní gban̄gba nínú èyí tí ẹni tí a fi ẹ̀sùn kàn yóò ti ní gbogbo ohun tí ó nílò láti fi ṣe àwíjàre ara rẹ̀.
__label__yo Ẹnì kọ̀ọ̀kan ló ní ẹ̀tọ́ sí òmì nira láti ní ìmọ̀ràn tí ó wù ú, kí ó sì sọ irú ìmọ̀ràn bẹ́ẹ̀ jáde; ẹ̀tọ́yìí gbani láàyè láti ní ìmọ̀ràn yòówù láìsí àtakò láti ọ̀dọ̀ ẹnìkẹ́ni láti wádìí ọ̀rọ̀, láti gba ìmọ̀ràn lọ́dọ̀ ẹlòmíràn tàbí láti gbani níyànjú lọ́nàkọ́nà láìka ààlà orílẹ̀‐èdè kankan kún.
